 Principles	of   
Naval	Architecture 
Second		Revision



Volume III • Motions	in Waves 
and Controllability



Edward	V. Lewis, Editor



Published by
The Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers 
601 Pavonia Avenue
Jersey  City, NJ


















Copyright © 1989 by The Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers.

It  is  understood  and   agreed   that   nothing   expressed   herein   is  intended   or  shall   be  construed   to 
give any  person,  firm,  or  corporation  any  right,  remedy,  or  claim  against  SNAME  or  any  of  its  
officers or members.


Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 88-60829 
ISBN No. 0-939773-02-3
Printed in the  United  States  of America 
First Printing, November, 1989



























ii








Preface
  The aim of this second revision (third edition) of the Society's successful Principles 
of Naval Architecture was  to bring  the  subject  matter  up-to-date  through  revising 
or rewriting areas of greatest recent technical advances, which meant that some 
chapters would require many more changes than others. The basic objective of the 
book, however, remained unchanged: to provide a timely survey of the basic prin- 
ciples in the field of naval architecture for the use of both students and active 
professionals, making clear that  research  and engineering  are continuing  in almost 
all  branches4  the  subject.  References  to  available  sources  of additional  details 
and to ongoing work to be followed in the future are included.
  The preparation of this third edition was simplified by an earlier decision to 
incorporate a number of sections into the companion SNAME publication,  Ship 
Design and Construction, which was revised in 1980. The topics of Load Lines, 
Tonnage Admeasurement and Launching seemed to be more  appropriate  for the  
latter book, and so Chapters  V,  VI,  and  XI became  IV, V  and  XVII  respectively, 
in Ship Design and Construction. This left eight chapters, instead of 11, for  the 
revised Principles of Naval Architecture, which has since become nine in three 
volumes.
  At the outset of work on the revision, the Control Committee decided that the 
increasing importance of high-speed computers demanded that their use  be  dis- 
cussed in the individual chapters  instead  of in  a  separate  appendix  as  before.  It 
was also decided that throughout the book more attention should be given to the 
rapidly developing advanced marine vehicles.
  In regard to units of measure, it was  decided  that  the  basic  policy would be to  
use  the  International	System   of  Units   (S.I.): Since  this   is a  transition	period, 
conventional U.S. (or "English") units would be given in parentheses, where  prac- 
tical,  throughout	the book. This follows the practice adopted for the, Society's 
companion volume, Ship Design and Construction. The U.S. Metric  Conv~rsion Act 
of 1975 (P.L. 94-168) declared a national policy of increasing the use  of  metric 
systems  of measurement	and established the U.S. Metric Board to coordinate 
voluntary   conversion  to S.1. The Maritime  Administration,	assisted by a SNAME 
ad hoc task group, developed a Metric Practice  Guide  to  "help  obtain  uniform 
metric practice in the marine industry," and this guide was used here as a basic 
reference. Following this guide, ship displacement in metric tons (1000  kg)  rep- 
resents mass rather  than  weight.  an  this  book the  familiar  symbol, A, is reserved 
for the displacement mass). When forces are considered,  the  corresponding  unit  is 
the kilonewton (kN), which applies, for example, to resistance and to displacement 
weight (symbol l-v, where W = pAg) or to buoyancy forces. When conventional or 
English   units   are  used,  displacement	weight   is  in   the   familiar   long  ton unit
(Continued)

iii


PREFACE

(2240-lb)~which numerically  is 1.015 X metric  ton. Power is usually  in  kilowatts 
(1 kW = 1.34 hp). A conversion table also is included in the Nomenclature at the 
end of each volume
  The :first volume of the third edition of Principles of Naval Architecture, com- 
prising Chapters I through IV, deals with the essentially static principles of naval 
architecture, leaving dynamic aspects to the remaining volumes. The second vol- 
ume consists of Chapters V Resistance, VI Propulsion and VII Vibration, each of 
which has been extensively revised or rewritten.
  Volume III contains the two final chapters, VIII Motions in Waves and IX 
Controllability. Because of important recent theoretical and experimental devel- 
opments in these fields, it was necessary to rewrite most of both chapters and to 
add much new material. But the state-of-the-art continues to advance, and so 
extensive references to continuing work are included.
November 1989	Edward V. Lewis
Editor





































iv











Table	of	Contents 
Volume III


Page

Page
Preface ....................................
iii
Acknowledgments ..........................
vi
Chapter   8 (VIII)	MOTIONS   IN WAVES
ROBERTF.  BECK, Professor,	University of Michigan; WILLIAME. CUMMINS*,* David Taylor Research
Center; JOHN F. DALZELL,David Taylor Research Center; PHILIP MANDEL*, and WILLIAMC. WEBSTER, 
Professor,	University of California, Berkeley
1. Introduction ...........................	1	5. Derived Reshonses ....................	109
2. Ocean Waves ..........................	3	6. Control of S  ip Motions ...............	126
3. Ship Responses  to  Regular Waves ....	41	7. Assessing Ship Seaway Performance	137
4. The Ship in a Seaway .................	84	8. Design Aspects ........................	160
References	177
Nomenclature  ...................................	188
Chapter   9 (IX)	CONTROLLABILITY
  C.	LINCOLNCRANE,* * Exxon  Corporation;	HARUZOEDA, Professor,	Stevens   Institute	of Technology; 
ALExANDERC.  LANDSBURGU,  .S.  Maritime   Administration
1.	Introduction ...........................	191	9. Theoretical Prediction of Design
2.	The  Control Lo0li and Basic	Coefficientand Systems
E9.uations of	otion ................	192	Identification ........................	234
3.	Motion Stability and	10. Acceleratin~, Stopping and Backing ...	251
Linear Equations ....................	195	11. Automatic  ontrol Systems ...........	264
4.	Analysis  of Course Keeping-	12. Effects of the Environment ............	268
Controls-Fixed Stability .............	199	13. Vessel Waterway  Interactions .........	279
5.	Stability  and Control ..................	205	14. ~drodynamics	of  Control Surfaces ...	291
6.	AnalYSISof  Turning Ability ...........	209	15. aneuvering Trials and Performance
7.	Free  Running Model Tests	Requirements  .......................	316
and Hydraulic Models...............	215	16. Application to Design .................	327
8.	Nonlinear  Equations of Motion	17. Design of Rudder and Other Control
and  Captive Model Tests ............	217	Devices..............................	364
References  ......................................	408
Nomenclature  ...................................	418
General Symbols ................................	421
Index ............................................	424
•	Now retired
•• Deceased
Note: The office affiliations given are those at the time of writing the chapters.

v







Acknowledgments
  In this Volume III, the Editor wishes to thank  the  authors  of  Chapter  VIII,  
Robert F. Beck, John F. Dalzell, Philip Mandel and William C. Webster, for stepping 
in to complete the chapter on Motions in Waves after the untimely death of William
E. Cummins. He also acknowledges the valuable assistance of SNAME T&R Panel H-
7 (Seakeeping Characteristics) chaired by David D. Moran, in reviewing and 
commenting on early drafts of the chapter manuscript. Generous permission was 
granted by D. C. Murdey and his associates in the National Research Council of 
Canada for us to publish excerpts from their valuable reports on a series  of model  
tests in calm water and in waves. Drafting services were provided by Keith L. 
MacPhee.
  The Editor also wishes to express his appreciation  for John  Nachtsheim's  val- 
uable efforts in guiding the completion of Chapter IX on Controllability, and to 
Alexander Landsburg for joining in to assist the original two authors.  All  three 
authors wish to acknowledge their  indebtedness  to  Philip  Mandel,  the  author  of  
the corresponding chapter in  the  preceding  edition.  Extensive  use has  been  made 
of the original text and figures. The authors also wish to  thank  the  members  of  
Panel H-10 (Ship Controllability) who provided useful comments, especially Abra- 
ham Taplin. Completion of this  chapter  was  greatly  facilitated  by  Roderick  A. 
Barr, who assisted in organizing the chapter in its early stages, by the excellent 
technical review and suggestions given by John A. Youngquist, and by the drafting 
services of Robinson de la Cruz.
  The Control Committee provided essential guidance, as well as valuable  assist- 
ance in the early stages. Members are:
John J. Nachtsheim, Chairman 
Thomas M. Buermann
William A. Cleary, Jr. 
Richard B. Couch 
Jerome L. Goldman 
Jacques B. Hadler 
Ronald K.  Kiss 
Donald P. Roseman 
Stanley G. Stiansen 
Charles Zeien
  The Editor wishes to thank all of the Volume III authors  for their  fine work and  
full cooperation in making suggested revisions. Finally, he acknowledges the in- 
dispensable efforts of Trevor Lewis.J ones in doing detailed editing  and  preparing 
text and figures in proper format for publication.
November  1989	E. V. Lewis
Editor


vi


 









Section	1
Introduction 1
  1.1 Ship motions at  sea   have always been  a problem	and head seas  westbound  that  greatly  reduced  the 
for  the  naval  architect.  His  or  her responsibility  has	speed of low-powered ships.
been  to  insure  not  only that  the  ship  can  safely  ride   The  situation  is  different  for  today's   modern  fast 
out the roughest storms but that  it  can  proceed  on  passenger  vessels  and  high-powered  cargo  ships.  In 
course under severe conditions with a  minimum  of  really  rough  head  seas,  their  available  power  is  ex- 
delay, or carry out other specificmissions successfully. cessive and must be reduced voluntarily to avoid ship- 
However, the problem has changed through the years. ping of water forward or incurring structural damage 
Sailing vessels  followed the prevailing winds-Colum-  to  the  bottom   from   slamming.   Hence,  maintaining 
bus sailed west on the northeast trades and rode the schedule now depends as much on ship motions as on 
prevailing westerlies farther north on his return voy- available power.
ages.  The early  clipper ships and the later grain racers		Similarly, high-powered naval vessels must often 
from  Australia  to  Burope  made  wide detours to take	slow down in rough seas in order to reduce the motions 
advantage   of the  trade  winds. In  so doing they made	that affect the performance of their particular mission 
good time  in spite  of the  extra  distance travelled, but	or function-such	as sonar search, landing of aircraft 
the impbrtant  fact  for the present  purpose  is that they	or helicopters and convoy escort duty. Furthermore, 
seldom  encountered head seas.	new and unusual high-performance craft-compara-
  With  the  advent  of steam,  for  the  first  time in the	tively  small in size-have	appeared whose perform- 
history  of navigation,  ships were able to move directly	ance is even more drastically affected by ocean waves. 
to windward.  Hence, shipping water  in heavy weather	These include high-speed planing craft, hydrofoil 
caused  damage  to superstructures,	deck fittings  and	boats, catamarans and surface effect ships, most but 
batches   to  increase,   and  structural   bottom  damage	not all being developed or considered for military uses. 
near  the  bow appeared  as a result  of slamming. Struc-		A very different but related set  of  problems  has 
tural   improvements   and  easing  of  bottom lines for-	arisen in the development of large floating structures 
ward  relieved the  latter  situation,  and for many years	and platforms that must be towed long distances and 
moderately  powered  cargo  ships could use full engine	be accurately positioned in stormy seas for ocean-drill- 
power  in almost  any  weather,  even though speed was	ing and other purposes.
reduced  by wind and sea.  The same  is true even today			As seakeeping problems have thus became more se- 
for   giant,   comparatively   low-powered  tankers   and		rious, particularly for the  design of  higher-speed 
many dry-bulk carriers.		oceangoing vessels, rapid expansion began in the mid- 
For  many  years  the  pilot charts  issued  by the U.S.	1950s in the application of hydrodynamic theory, use 
Navy  Oceanographic  Officestill showed special routes		of experimental model techniques and collection of full- 
for  "low-powered  steamers"   to  avoid head winds and		scale empirical data. These important developments led 
seas.  It  should  be  emphasized  that  the routes  shown		to a better understanding  of  the  problems and ways 
for  the  North   Atlantic,  for  example,  did not involve		of dealing with them. Along with remarkable advances 
avoiding bad weather  as such, for eastbound the routes		in oceanography  and computer  technology,  they made
for low and high-powered steamers  were the same; but	it possible to predict in statistical terms many aspects 
they  did  attempt   to  avoid  the  prevailing head winds		of  ship performance  at  sea.  Furthermore,   they could
be applied to the seagoing problems involved in the 
design  of the  unusual  new high-speed  craft  and float-
lThis  section   written    by the  editor.	ing platforms previously mentioned.


2	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



  In view of the increasing importance of theoretical 
approaches to seakeeping problems, it is felt to be 
essential to cover in this chapter in a general way the 
basic hydrodynamic principles and mathematical tech- 
niques involved in predicting ship motions in both reg- 
ular and irregular seas (Sections 2, 3 and 4). Some 
readers may wish to proceed directly to Sections 5-8, 
which discuss more practical aspects of ship motions 
and the problems of design for good seakeeping per- 
formance.
  The understanding of ship motions at sea, and the 
ability to predict the behavior of any ship or marine 
structure in the design  stage,  begins  with  the  study 
of the nature of the ocean waves that constitute the 
environment of the seagoing vessel. The outstanding 
characteristic of the open ocean is its irregularity, not 
only when storm winds are blowing but even under 
relatively calm conditions. Oceanographers have found 
that irregular seas can be described by statistical 
mathematics on the basis of the assumption  that  a 
large    number  of  regular	waves having different 
lengths, directions, and amplitudes are linearly super- 
imposed. This powerful concept is discussed in Section 
2 of this chapter, but it  is  important  to  understand 
that the characteristics of idealized regular waves, 
found in reality only in the laboratory, are also fun- 
damental for the description and understanding of re- 
alistic irregular seas.
  Consequently,  in Section 2-after	a brief discussion 
of the origin and propagation of ocean  waves-the 
theory of regular gravity waves of simple form is 
presented. Mathematical models describing the com- 
plex irregular patterns actually observed at sea and 
encountered by a moving ship are then discussed in 
some detail. The essential feature of  these  models is 
the concept of  a  spectrum,  defining  the  distribution 
of energy among the different hypothetical regular 
components	having	various	frequencies	(wave 
lengths) and directions. It is shown that various sta- 
tistical characteristics of any seaway can be deter- 
mined from such spectra. Sources of data on wave 
characteristics and spectra for various oceans of the 
world are presented.
  It has been found that the irregular  motions of  a 
ship in a seaway can be described as the linear super- 
position of the responses of the ship to all the wave 
components of such a seaway. This principle of su- 
perposition, which was first applied to ships by St. 
Denis and Pierson (1953),2 requires knowledge of both 
the sea components and the ship responses to them.
  Hence, the vitally important linear theory of ship 
motions in simple, regular waves is next developed in 
Section 3. It begins with the simple case of pitch, heave 
and surge in head seas and then goes on to the general 
case of six degrees of freedom. The equations of mo-

2Complete references are listed at end of chapter.
 

tion are presented and the hydrodynamic forces 
eval- uated on the basis of potential theory. The use 
of strip theory is then described as a convenient 
way to per- form the integration for a slender body 
such as a ship. Finally, practical data  and  
experimental  results  for two cases are presented: 
the longitudinal motions of pitch-heave-surge 
alone, and the transverse motions
of roll-sway-yaw.
  In Section 4 the extension of the problem of 
ship motions to realistic irregular seas is 
considered in de- tail, the object being to show 
how modern techniques make it possible to predict 
motions of almost any type of craft or floating 
structure in any seaway in prob- ability terms. It is 
shown that, knowing the wave spec- trum and the 
characteristic response of a ship to the component 
waves of the irregular sea, a response spec- trum 
can be determined. From it various statistical 
parameters of response can be obtained, just as 
wave characteristics are obtainable from wave 
spectra. Re- sponses to long-crested seas are 
treated first, and then the more general case of 
short-crested seas. Particular attention is given to 
the short-term statistics  of peaks, or maxima, of 
responses such as pitch, heave and roll; both 
motions and accelerations. Examples of typical 
calculations are included.
  Section 5 considers the prediction of responses 
other than the simple motions of pitch, heave, roll, 
etc. These so-called derived responses include first 
the vertical motion (and velocity and acceleration)  
of any point in a ship as the result of the combined 
effect of all six modes, or degrees of freedom.
  Consideration is given next to the relative 
motion of points in the ship and the  water  
surface,  which leads to methods of calculating 
probabilities of shipping water on deck, bow 
emergence and slamming. Non- linear effects 
come in here and are discussed, along with non-
linear responses such as added resistance and 
power in waves. Finally, various wave-induced  
loads on a ship's hull structure are considered, 
some of which also involve non-linear effects.
  Section 6 discusses the control of ship motions 
by means of various devices. Passive devices that 
do not require power or controls comprise bilge 
keels, anti- rolling tanks and moving weights. Five 
performance criteria for such devices are 
presented, and the influ- ence of each is shown by 
calculations for a ship rolling in beam seas. Active 
devices, such as gyroscopes, con- trollable fins and 
controlled rudders are then dis- cussed.
  Section 7 deals with criteria and indexes of sea- 
keeping performance. It is recognized  that,  in 
order  for new designs to be evaluated and their 
acceptability determined, it is essential to establish 
standards of performance, just as in other  chapters  
where  criteria of stability, subdivision and 
strength are presented.
  Various desirable features of ship behavior  
have been listed from time to time under the 
heading of seakindliness. These include easy 
motions, (Le., low


MOTIONS    IN  WAVES	,3


accelerations),   dry  decks,  absence  of  slamming  and	sels, but also to Coast Guard cutters, fishing vessels 
propeller   racing,  and  easy  steering.   For naval ships	on fishing grounds, oceanographic ships and floating 
important   additional   considerations  include  weapon	platforms. For such ships the SPI defines the effec- 
system  performance,  landing  of helicopters and sonar	tiveness of the ship in fulfilling specific missions or 
search   effectiveness.  This  section  considers in detail	functions, usually in terms of the fraction of time that 
specific criteria  by  which  to  judge  whether   or not a	the ship can do so over a stated period.  Methods  of 
ship can carry   out  a particular  mission in a given sea	calculating these SPIs are given, along with specific 
condition,  speed  and  heading.  These criteria  usually	examples.
involve values  of motion amplitude,  velocity or accel-		Finally, having criteria and indexes of performance 
eration   at   specific  locations  in  the  ship, or motions		whereby predictions can be tested, the naval architect 
relative   to  the   sea  affecting  shipping  of water  and		requires guidance as to choice of ship form, propor- 
slamming.  Available  prescribed  values  of acceptable		tions, natural periods of rolling and pitching, freeboard 
performance  are  tabulated  for different  types of craft		forward and other  characteristics  favorable to good 
and various missions.		seagoing performance. In Section 8 the theoretical 
However,  whether  or not a ship can meet  any of the	principles and experimental data developed in preced- 
criteria  depends on factors  such as sea condition, speed		ing sections  are  applied  to  providing such  needed 
and  heading.  Therefore,   a Seakeeping  Performance		guidelines. Emphasis is on choosing the overall ship 
Index   (SPI)  is  needed  that  takes  account  of  all the		proportions and coefficients, since they must be estab- 
different  sea  conditions expected over a period of time		lished early in the design process  and  are shown to 
and  the   speeds  and  headings   attainable   in each.  It		have more influence on performance than  minor 
should measure  the effectiveness of a  ship in attaining		changes in full form.  Consideration  is  also given to 
its  mission  or missions  in service. Two basic SPIs are		above-water form and freeboard, and to added power 
described:  A Transit  Speed  SPI  and a Mission Effec-		requirements in waves. Special design problems of
tiveness  SPI. The first  applies particularly to merchant	high-performance craft are discussed.
ships whose mission is to deliver cargo and passengers Consideration is also given to design procedures  that 
safely and promptly, and is expressed as attainable permit  seakeeping  considerations  to be taken  into ac- 
average speed over one or more voyages without ex- count from the outset. It is shown that a choice among 
ceeding the  applicable  criteria.  This  SPI  also  applies  alternative  designs  can  be made  on the  basis  of eco- 
to some functions of naval ships. The second SPI, Mis- nomic considerations, for both  commercial and  naval 
sion Effectiveness, applies particular~y to naval ves- vessels.


Section 2 
Ocean Waves3
   2.1  Origin  and  Propagation  of   Ocean   Waves.   As   under   such  conditions  they  are  approximately   Gaus-  
noted in Section 1, the outstanding visible character-  sian in character,  i.e., wave elevations  read  at  random 
istic of waves in the open ocean is their irregularity. or at regular  intervals  of time  have  roughly  a  Gaus-  
Study of wave records confirms this irregularity of the sian, or normal, probability density function. This char- 
sea, both in time and space. However, one is equally acteristic greatly simplifies the application of statistics, 
impressed by the fact that over a fairly wide area and probability theory  and Fourier  analysis  techniques  to 
often for a period of a half-hour or more the sea may the development of suitable models.
maintain a characteristic appearance, because record The theory  of  seakeeping  uses  such  mathematical 
analyses indicate it  is very  nearly  statistically  steady  models of  ocean waves,  which account  for  variability 
or stationary. At other times  or places  the  sea  con-  of waves  in time and space, so long as conditions re-  
dition will be quite different,  and  yet  there  will again  main steady,  permitting  estimates  of  short-term  ship 
be  a  characteristic  appearance,  with  different  but  performance  for  realistic  environmental   conditions 
steady statistical parameters. Hence,  for  most  prob-  over a relatively  small area.  These theories  are  based 
lems of behavior of  ships  and  floating  structures  at  upon mathematical  wave theory  as well as on the laws 
sea, attention can be focused on describing mathe- of probability and statistics. The details of one model, 
matically the surface waves as a random, or stochastic, particularly as they concern the naval architect, will 
process under short-term statistically stationary con- be developed in this section.
ditions. Analysis  of wave records  has  also shown that	However, for an overall understanding, as well as
for solving some seakeeping problems, the  variation  
in waves over long periods of time and over great
3  By  William   E.  Cummins,   with   paragraphs     by  John F. Dalzell.	distances  cannot be overlooked. It is useful, therefore,


4	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



to review the physical processes of storm wave gen­ 
eration and of wave propagation in a general way.
  Storm waves are generated by the interaction of  
wind and the water surface. There are at least two 
physical processes involved, these being the friction 
between air and water and the local pressure fields 
associated with the wind blowing over the wave sur­ 
face. Although a great deal of work has been done on 
the theory of wave generation by wind, as summarized 
by Korvin-Kroukovsky (1961) and Ursell (1956), no 
completely satisfactory mechanism has yet been de­ 
vised to explain the transfer of energy from wind  to 
sea. Nevertheless, it seems reasonable to assume that 
the total storm wave system is the result of many local 
interactions distributed over space and time. These 
events can be expected to be independent unless they 
are very close in both space and time. Each event will 
add a small local disturbance to the existing wave


value of vertical displacement at any instant, t, in a 
regular component wave, {;, is zero (if it is assumed 
to be of sinusoidal form, as discussed subsequently), 
and therefore the average value for the wave system, 
("x, y, t)), is also zero. However, the variance (or 
mean square deviation from the mean) of{;, which is 
the average value of {/, written (U), is a positive 
quantity that measures the severity of the sea. A fun­ 
damental theorem of statistics states that the 
variance of the sum of a set of independent random 
variables tends asymptotically to the sum of the 
variances of the component variables. Thus, for a 
very large (infi­ nite) number of components, 
assumed to be indepen­ dent,
                                (2)
A final statistical conclusion  is a consequence of the
central limit theorem of statistics. In the case under


  Within the storm area, there will be wave interac­ 
tions and wave-breaking processes that will affect and 
limit the growth and propagation of waves from the 
many local disturbances. Nevertheless, wave studies 
show that if wave amplitudes are  small the  principle 
of linear superposition governs the propagation and 
dispersion of the wave systems outside the generating
area. Specifically, if {1(x, y, t) and {z(x, y, t) are two 
wave systems, {1(x, y,  t)  + {2(x,  y, t)  is also a  wave 
system. This implies that one wave system can move
through another wave system without modification. 
While this statement is not absolutely true; it is very 
nearly so, except when the sum is steep enough for 
wave breaking to occur.
  A second important characteristic of water waves 
that affects the propagation of wave systems is that.· 
in deep water the phase velocity, or celerity, of a sim­ 
ple regular wave, such as can be generated in an ex­ 
perimental tank, is a function of wavelength. Longer 
waves travel faster than shorter waves. Study and 
analysis of ocean wave records has shown that any 
local system can be resolved into a sum of component 
regular waves of various lengths and directions, using 
Fourier Integral techniques. By an extension of the 
principle of superposition, the subsequent behavior of 
the sum of these component regular wave systems will 
determine the visible system of waves. Since these 
component waves have different celerities and direc­ 
tions, the propagating pattern will slowly change with 
time.
  If the propagating wave system over a short period 
of time is the sum of a very large number of separate 
random contributions, all essentially independent, the 
surface elevation is


a normal (or Gaussian) density function, even if the 
component variables Ux, y, t) are not distributed nor­ 
mally. The importance of this result is that the density 
function of a normal random variable is known if its 
mean and variance are known. Therefore, if the vari­ 
ance of the surface elevation in the multi-component 
wave system can be estimated, its probability  density 
as a random variable is known. Ochi (1986) deals with 
the analysis of non-Gaussian random processes.
  These conclusions from the laws of statistics all de­ 
pend upon the previously mentioned principle of su­ 
perposition, which holds approximately but not 
absolutely for water waves, and on the assumption of 
independence of component waves. Therefore, the 
con­ clusions themselves are approximate and this 
should be remembered. However, it has been found 
that over the short term, deviations become 
significant only when the waves are very steep, and 
even then pri­ marily in those characteristics that are 
strongly influ­ enced by the crests.
  It will be shown that the short-term  descriptive 
model that has been described leads to a mathematical 
technique for describing the irregular sea at a given 
location and time, while conditions remain steady or 
stationary. Each sea condition  can for  short  periods 
of time be as  unique as  a fingerprint, and yet, as  with 
a fingerprint, it has order  and  pattern,  as defined  by 
its directional spectrum, to be explained subsequently 
(Section 2.6). However, since the wind velocities and 
directions are continually, albeit slowly, changing, the 
short-term mathematical description will also change. 
Hence, a broader model is also needed to cover large 
variations in time, involving wind effects on  growth 
and decline of local wave systems, as well as propa­
gation and dispersion.


"x, y, t) = L {;(x, y, t)
i


(1)
  

Fig. l(a) symbolizes a storm-wave 
generation area. It may be assumed 
that disturbances are being gen­


and the laws of statistics yield some very useful con­ 
clusions. Since water is incompressible, the average


erated by the interaction of the wind and sea surface 
throughout the storm area from the time the wind


MOTIONS IN WAVES	5


the sum of effects due all disturbances in the gener- 
ation area that are upwind of a line through the ob- 
servation point perpendicular to the wind direction. 
Because of angular dispersion, or spreading, the many 
wave systems will come from different directions, and 
the combined system will generally show short-crest- 
edness.
  If there is a boundary to windward of the generation 
area, a shore or the edge of the storm, the total wave 
systems at a series of observation points will differ in 
character as the points approach the  boundary,  as  
there will be fewer disturbances propagating over the 
observation point. This distance from the observation 
point to the boundary is called the fetch. Also, if the 
waves are observed at a fixed point, starting with the 
inception of the wind, the wave system will grow with 
time. The time interval between storm inception and 
observation is called duration. If wind speed is steady, 
while fetch and/ or duration are increased, the sea 
condition eventually takes on a statistically stable 
structure which is called fully developed. Further in- 
creases in fetch and duration have no significant effect 
on the statistical characteristics of the wave pattern.
  If the observation point is outside the storm area, 
Fig. l(c), then it is seen that the arriving seas, now 
called swells, clearly have a more regular character, 
depending upon the distance and area of the  storm. The 
crests of the various component wave trains be- come 
more nearly parallel as the observation point recedes 
from the storm area, with the result that actual waves 
become more and more  long-crested, that  is, the 
identifiable length of a wave crest becomes large 
compared with the spacing  between crests.  Distance 
or fetch has the effect of limiting the range of wave- 
lengths (frequencies) reaching  an observation point at 
a given time, i.e., the greater the distance, the nar- 
rower the bandwidth of frequencies. This filtering ef- 
fect is due to the different celerities of the different 
component wavelengths. The lengths of waves in this 
band decrease with time, with the shortest identifiable 
components being greatly attenuated and perhaps ar- 
riving well after the storm has passed. These qualities of 
long-crestedness and limited bandwidth are respon- 
sible for the characteristic regular appearance of swell. 
A complete long-term description can best be pro- 
vided by specifying many spectra (short-term) for dif- 
ferent points throughout the area under consideration, 
and at regular increments of time. Despite the lack of
an entirely satisfactory theory of wave generation, 
oceanographers have devised semi-empirical methods 
of predicting the changing wave spectra by consider- 
ing the effect of winds on the growth or decay of local 
wave systems. For example, Pierson, et al (1955) de- 
scribed a method of accomplishing this, making use of 
theoretical work of Phillips and Miles, as well as em- 
pirical data. See Section 2.9.
  Since the short-term irregular wave patterns ob- 
served at sea will be described in terms of regular


6	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



component wave trains of different frequency and di­ 
rection, it is important to consider next the character­ 
istics of simple gravity waves.
  2.2 Theory of Simple Gravity Waves. In the hydro­ 
dynamic theory of surface waves it  is  assumed  that 
the crests are straight, infinitely long, parallel and 
equally spaced, and that wave heights  are  constant. 
The wave form advances in a direction  perpendicular 
to the line of crests at a uniform velocity, Ve, usually 
referred to as celerity to emphasize that it is the wave 
form rather than the water particles  that  advances. 
Such simple waves are usuaily referred to as two­ 
dimensional waves. It is assumed in wave theory that 
water has zero viscosity and is incompressible. It is 
convenient also to assume that, although waves are 
created by wind forces, atmospheric pressure on the 
water surface is constant after the wave train has been 
established.
The surface wave is the visible manifestation of


+z, :t










- z,t




















Fig. 2 Coordinates for waves
cosh k(z + h) sinh kh


pressure changes and water-particle motions affecting 
the entire body of fluid-theoretically to its full depth. 
The motion of particles under the idealized conditions 
can be characterized conveniently by a quantity known 
as the velocity potential cf> which is defined as a func­ 
tion whose negative derivative in any direction yields 
the velocity component of the fluid in the same direc­ 
tion. From this function all of the desired wave char­ 
acteristics can be derived. Treatises on hydrodynamics 
give the velocity potential for a two-dimensional wave 
in any depth of water and express the resulting wave 
form by a Fourier series (Korvin-Kroukovsky, 1961; 
Lamb, 1924). If certain simplifications are introduced, 
which amount to assuming the waves to be of very


approaches ekz and the expression for the velocity po­ 
tential becomes
             cf> =  - fVeekz sin k(x -  Vet)	(4)
Hence, the horizontal and vertical components of water 
velocity at any point in deep water are given by

u  =   -   ::    =   kf  Veekz cos k(x -   Vet)	(5)
and
w =	= kf Veekz sin k(x  -  Vet)	(6)


small (theoretically infinitesimal) amplitudes, the so­ 
called first-order theory reduces the wave to the first 
harmonic alone. (A more exact solution is discussed in 
Section 2.3). The simplified potential is as follows:
""=	-'V	cosh  k(z  + h). .	k(	_ V  )	( )
.,,	"'	c   sinh kh	sm   x	ct
The origin is taken at the still-water level directly over 
a hollow, Fig. 2; xis the horizontal coordinate, positive 
in the direction of wave propagation, and z is the ver­ 
tical coordinate, positive upward. This positive upward 
convention is adopted for  consistency  with the work 
on ship motions to follow, although it differs from some 
references. Also
'f is surface wave amplitude (half-height from 
crest to trough)
Lw is wave length
h is depth of water
k is the wave number, 21r I Lw
Ve is wave velocity or celerity
tis time


If the path of a particular particle be traced 
through  a complete cycle, it will be found that in 
deep water all !)articles  describe circular paths 
having radii that
are f at  the surface and decrease  with depth  in pro­
portion to ekz. Strictly, z should here be measured to 
the center of the circular path described by the 
particle. In shallow water the particles move in 
ellipses with a constant horizontal distance between 
foci and with ver­ tical semi-axes varying with 
depth. At the bottom, the vertical semi-axis is zero, 
and the particles oscillate back and forth on straight 
lines.
  To determine the foregoing velocities in any 
partic­ ular case, it is necessary to derive an 
expression for wave velocity Ve. Books by Milne-
Thompson (1960) and Korvin-Kroukovsky (1961), 
show that the  conditions of velocity and pressure at 
the surface of the wave require that
                               (7)
Inserting Equation (3) for the potential  in  (7), it can  
be shown that


  For the case of deep water (roughly h > Lw/2) the 
ratio


V 2  =	tanh kh


(8)


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	7


which defines  the velocity  of  a  wave in any depth of
water. Then in very shallow water (roughly h < L,,,/25)


Hence, circular frequency
277'	(   277' )l/2	l/2


V.2 = gh
and  in  deep  water (h  > Lw/2),
V.2 = glk	= gL,,,1211'


(9)

(10)



and


w =  -	=	--	=  (kg)	= kV.
T,,,	Lwlg

to = f COS (kx - "'t)


(17)


(18)


  For many problems the most important aspect of 
waves is the distribution of pressure below the surface. 
It is convenient to compute the pressure relative to 
horizontal lines of constant pressure in still water. The
elevation  t of lines of equal pressure in a wave relative
to the still-water pressure lines, Fig. 2, is obtained from 
the expression


When observed at a fixed point, with x = 0 to 
= f cos(- wt) = f cos "'t
Alternatively, if the wave profile is studied at t = 0
to=fcoskx
The slope of the wave surface is obtained by differ­


'=1-o­4>



(11)


entiation:	 	
dto = kf sin kx




(19)


which is derived in hydrodynamics texts (Lamb, 1924) 
by means of Bernoulli's theorem for a gravity force
acting on a body of fluid under uniform atmospheric 
pressure, assuming that wave height is small (strictly


dx
The slope is maximum when kx = 1T I 2 and sin kx =
1.0. Then


speaking, infinitesimal). Then for water of any depth


Madxto-=k{-


=21fT-1Th.,,	(


20)


t  =  k[V.2 cosh_k \;  h) cos k(x -  V.t)	(12)
g	sm
Since from Equation (8) kV.2I g  =  tanh  kh, this can 
be simplified to


dx	L.,,	L,,,
where h,,, is the wave height from hollow to crest. This 
maximum slope occurs midway between a crest and a 
hollow.
The contours of constant pressure that have been


r=	-,  cosh (z + h)	k(	_  V )
"'	"'	cosh kh	cos   x	.t


(13)


derived  in  Equations  (13) and  (14)  also  
indicate the
increase or decrease in pressure relative to 
still water at any point in terms of depth or 
head. Hence, to obtain


In deep water (large h) the ratio cosh k(z + h)I
cosh kh approaches ek•, and
t  =  [ek• cos  k(x  -  V.t)	(14)
  These expressions show that contours of equal pres­ 
sure at any depth are cosine curves which are functions 
of time when observed at a fixed point x0 or a function 
of  distance  x  at  a  particular  instant  t0 •   Since ekz de­ 
creases as z decreases, the contours of equal pressure
are attenuated with depth, approaching zero amplitude
as z -- - 00 • These contours are the same as those 
generated by the orbital motions of individual parti­ 
cles.
To obtain the surface wave profile, z is taken equal
to zero in Equation (13) or (14). Then


the pressure p at any point we need only multiply the 
head by density pg, or
p  = pg(-z + t)
In deep water, then, from Equations (11) and (14)
p = -pgz + f pgekz cos (kx - "'t)
As previously noted, z should be measured to the cen­ ter 
of the circular path described by the particle at the point 
in question.
  Evaluation of the equation for pressure in a deep­ 
water wave under the crest, at 2r below the original still-
water level (z = - 2r), gives, for example
p = -pg( -2{> + f pge2 = pfg(2 + e2 )


to = f cos k(x - V.t)
for both deep and shallow water.


(15) and for k = 0.015, and r = 10, for 
example:
p = pfg(2.0 + 0.74) = 
pfg(2.74)


  A more convenient form for the equation of a simple 
harmonic wave can be obtained by using circular fre­ 
quency w = 211' I Tw. The period T.,, is the time required 
for the wave to travel one wave length, and hence the 
relationship between wave length and period in deep 
water can be derived from Equation (10).


If the pressure were directly proportional to depth below 
the surface, it would be pf g(3.0) at this point. The 
difference represents the so-called Smith effect (Smith, 
1883). Similarly, under the wave hollow at a
depth of 2f below still-water level (z = -2n,


T	_  Lw  _	Lw	_   (277'L.)., 112



(16)


p = pf g(2.0 - 0.74) = pf g(l.26)


w  -	V-.	(gLw/211')1/2-	-g-


instead of pf g(l.0). Thus 
under the crest the pressures


8	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



are decreased, and under the hollow the pressures are 
increased, by the Smith effect.
  The energy in a train of regular waves consists of
kinetic energy associated with the orbital motion of 
water particles and potential energy  resulting  from  
the change of water level in wave hollows and crests. 
The ki etic energy can be derived from the velocity 
potent al. For one wave length L.., the kinetic energy 
per umt breadth of a wave of small height is given in 
books on hydrodynamics (Lamb, 1924; Korvin-Krou­ 
kovsky, 1961), as

oz
This is evaluated for a simple cosine wave as
¾ f 2  pgL ..,
The potential energy due to the elevation of water in 
one wave length is obtained by taking static moments
!!bout the  still-water  level. A unit increment of  area is
{ dx a d the lever arm is {o/2. Hence, integrating, 
potential energy is L


                              (23)
That is, the variance of wave elevation of a single 
cycle of a sine wave is equal to one-half the square 
of the amplitude. This theorem is also true for a 
finite number of complete cycles, or in the limit as 
T -+ oo in Equation (22).
  For the work to follow, the two-dimensional 
regular wave can be considered to be a three-
dimensional wave train with straight, infinitely long 
crests, i.e., a long­ crested regular wave. 
Furthermore, with axes fixed in the earth the 
surface elevation of such waves traveling at any 
angle, µ, to the x-axis can be described by the 
general equation,
{(x, y, t) = f cos [k(xcos ,.,_
                    + y sin µ) - wt + E] (24)
where E is a phase angle. For the case µ = 0 this 
equation reduces to Equation (18), except for the 
phase angle, which is needed when more than 
one wave is present.
If a fixed point at the origin is considered (x = O y
= O),  the equation becomes	'


"'pg({of 2)(0 dx


((t) = r COS 
(-wt + E)	(25)4


=½pg["' ( dx

Fora cosine wave,
{o = f cos k(x - Vet)
and at t = 0
(o = I cos kx
  

Wave Properties. The 
following is a summary of the 
properties of two-dimensional 
harmonic waves and waves of 
finite height in deep water (any 
consistent units):
Wave number	k = 2,,, / Lw = w2I 
g
Surface profile	(  0  =  l  COS  k(x 
-  Vet)	(15) (first 
approxima-


Hence, potential energy is


tion)


=l cos <kx - wt>


(18)


¼PpgLw
These derivations show that wave energy is half


Velocity potential	cf> = -lV '" sin k(x -  Vet)
	(4)
V =L"'= (gL"'f2 =gT.,,=[!_


kinetic and half potential when averaged over a wave 
length. Total energy is
½pgf2Lw


Wave celerity

Wave length


c	T	21'	21'	w (10)
L =	2,,, V/=	gT.,,2
"'	g	21'	(16)


Or the  average  energy  per  unit  area  of  surface, 
Ave. unit Energy  = ½ pgf2	(21)
  Another useful property of waves, especially  irreg- 
1:l.lar waves to be discussed in Section 2.6, is the var­ 
iance, or the mean-square value of surface elevation


Wave period	T.., = (2,,,£,,/ g f 2	(16)
Maximum wave
slope (first ap-	k(   = 2,,, -	= -"'
proximation)	Lw	L.,,	(20)
Wave energy per


as a function of time. In general, the variance of a 
continuous function with zero mean is given by,


unit area


½pgp


(21)


1 IT/2
(((t)2)  = }	T	-T/2 ,2 (t) dt
where the brackets ( ) indicate mean value of.



(22)


Wave variance	((2)  = ½ ,2	(23)
In feet-seconds units:
Wave celerity	V, = 2.26£.,,112


In t e case of a simple harmonic wave, as given by	 	


Equation (18) at x = 0, T can be taken as the wave 
period, and it can be shown that
 

4 f is often taken to represent the complex amplitude, in 
which case the imaginary part defines the phase angle and £ is 
unnecessary.


 


reduces rapidly with depth. Even at the surface  the 
drift velocity is only of the order of 2 to 3 percent of 
wave velocity, although it may be a significant per- 
centage of the water-particle velocities.
  While the Stokes wave, with its sharpened crest and 
flattened trough, is a more accurate geometrical model 
of real regular waves, it suffers from a limitation that 
negates its value in treating storm seas and swell, and 
the principle of superposition does not apply. If two 
Stokes waves are added, the sum is not a valid wave 
form. This is easily seen by simply adding two identical 
waves, which is equivalent to multiplying Equation (26) 
for	by 2. But for this to be a valid Stokes wave, the 
second term should have been multiplied by 4. It has 
become standard practice  to  accept  the  slight  errors 
in wave shape of linear harmonic wave theory in order 
to achieve simplicity in treating the additive wave sys- 
tems that are characteristic of both sea  and  swell. 
Errors in form become significant when waves become 
steep enough to approach breaking, and when the ge- 
ometry of the wave crest is  a  factor  in the  treatment 
of a problem. But a correct mathematical analysis of 
nonlinear short-crested irregular waves implies a great 
increase in complexity (St. Denis, 1980).
   2.4	Trochoidal  Waves.	From the early days of na- 
val architecture it has  been customary  to make use  of 
a trochoidal  wave in some ship-design problems.  It  is 
a convenient form from the geometrical point of view, 
but it fails to meet certain requirements of classical 
hydrodynamics and cannot be derived from the velocity 
potential. Its profile is almost identical with the second- 
order Stokes wave. In deep water all particles within 
trochoidal waves follow circular orbits about fixed cen- 
ters at a constant angular velocity. In any  horizontal 
line of orbit centers, the  radii are  equal but  the phase 
of adjacent particles varies successively. In any ver- 
tical line, all the particles have the same phase but the 
radii of their orbits decrease exponentially as the depth 
increases. Particles which, in still water, may be iden- 
tified by the intersections of  a rectangular  grid,  take 
the positions shown by the intersections of the dis- 
torted grid in Fig. 4 at some instant during the passage 
of a wave. Those which were originally in the same 
horizontal line lie on undulating surfaces, while those 
originally in the same vertical line lie along lines which 
sway from side to side, converging under  the  crests 
and diverging under the hollows. The orbit centers are 
somewhat above the still-water positions of the cor- 
responding particles. The wave form travels to the left 
when the generating circles, with fixed centers, revolve 
counterclockwise.
  The curve joining a series of particles originally in 
the same horizontal plane  is the  same  as  that  which 
is generated by a point on the radius of a circle as the 
circle rolls along the underside of a horizontal straight 
line, as is evident from a comparison of Figs. 4 and 5. 
Such curves, whose limit is the cycloid, are called tro- 
choids. They are also contours of equal pressure.


10	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




R • RADIUS OF ROLLING CIRCLE. 
SEE FIG. 5


x = RO + r sin (} =  RCJJt + r sin CJJt z = R + r cos 
(} = R + r cos "'t



(28)


















STILL WATER
LEVELS
















A VOLUME 
SUCH AS 
ABCO IN 
STILL 
WATER IS 
DISTORTE
D AS riCD' 
IN WPWE 
WATER

Fig. 4 
Trochoidal 
wave motion

















Fig. 5 
Geometry of 
trochoid
  

The 
radii 
of the 
circles 
in 
which 
the 
particl
es 
move 
decrea
se 
expon
entiall
y with 
depth; 
that is, 
as  in 
the 
case of 
the 
harmo
nic 
wave
r
  
=
 
r
o
e
k
z
where 
r O is 
the 
radius 
of a 
particl
e at 
the 
surfac
e and 
z is 
measu
red to 
the 
center 
of the 
circle 
in 
which 
the 
particl
e 
moves
.
  The 
trochoi
dal 
wave 
is 
somew
hat 
sharp 
in the 
crest 
and 
flat in 
the 
trough 
like a 
simple 
wave 
in a 
model 
tank, 
and 
like 
the 
Stokes 
wave, 
Fig. 3. 
Conse
quentl
y, for 
equal 
water 
volum
es the 
lines 
of 
orbit 
centers 
must 
be 
somew
hat 
above 
the 
corres
pondin
g still-
water 
lev­ els 
in 
order 
that 
the 
amoun
t of 
water 
in the 
crest 
will 
equal 
the 
amoun
t 
remov
ed in 
the 
hollow
. It can 
be 
shown 
that 
this 
rise of 
orbit 
centers 
is r 2 I 
2R, 
Fig. 4. 
Althou
gh the 
trochoi
dal 
wave 
is 
reason
ably 
realisti
c for 
waves 
up to 
about 
LI 20 
in 
height, 
the 
limitin
g case
of R = r 
gives an 
impossi
bly 
steep 
wave 
with 
very
sharp 
cusps. 
Other 
charac
teristi
cs of 
the 
trocho
idal 
wave, 
such 
as 
veloci
ty, 
period
, 
pressu
re 
chang
e with 
depth, 
are the 
same 
as for 
the 
simple 
harmo
nic 
wave 
previo
usly 
discus
sed.
  Obv
iously 
the 
pressur
e at 
any 
point 
on  the  
surface 
of a 
wave 
is 
atmosp
heric. 
Furthe
rmore, 
the 
sum of 
all the 
hydrod
ynami
c and 
buoya
nt 
forces 
acting 
on a 
sur­ 
face 
particl
e is 
perpen
dicular 
to the 
surface
, as 
dem­ 
onstrat
ed by 
Froude 
with a 
little 
float 
carryin
g a 
pendul
um. 
Althou
gh this 
statem
ent can 
be 
proved 
on the 
basis 
of the 
theory 
of  a  
simple  
harmo
nic 
wave, 
it is 
most 
easily 
demon
strated 
by 
means 
of 
trochoi
dal 
theory.
Following 
Froude's 
approach, it 
is 
convenient 
to deal


  If e call the o b_it radius _r and the amplitude 'l, 
then { = r. Quantities refemng  tf)  the  surface  wave 
are denoted by subscript O; thus { = r 0 • If R is the 
radius of the rolling circle and Lw is the wave length 
from crest to crest, Lw = 271'R. To draw a trochoidal­ 
wave sut1ace,  the selected  wave length  is divided  by 
a _convement number of equally spaced points, and,
with each as a center, a circle of diameter equal to the 
selected wave height is described. In these circles are 
drawn radi! at successive angles which increase by the 
same fraction of 360 deg as the spacing of  the circles 
in relation to wave length. The curve connecting the 
ends of those radii is the desired trochoid.
  In _Fig. 5, an ordinate z upward, and an angular 
velocity "' counterclockwise, are considered positive. 
i;:rom n initial position, shown at the left, the large 
c1:cle 1s assumed _to be rolling steadily, counterclock­ 
wise,  and  after  time  t  to  have  reached  the position
OCP, having turned through the angle (} = CJJt. In this
case (} is positive since "' is counterclockwise.
  The parametric equations of the trochoid in Fig. 5 
are


with the inertial reactions to the water-pressure forces 
acting on the particle P in Fig. 6, although the latter 
could also be determined directly. As previously 
shown, the buoyancy and hydrodynamic pressure 
forces in the wave cause the particle to move in a 
circular path, and the equal and opposite reactions 
consist of gravity mg acting downward and a centrif­ 
ugal reaction QF' resulting from orbital motion of the 
particle
mrCJJ 2
It can be shown that in a trochoidal gravity wave "' 2
= g IR and therefore the centrifugal reaction is
mg(r/R)
The resultant is PF in Fig. 6.
In triangles QCP and F'FP, PF' is in line with QP
and F'F is parallel to QC. Also

PF'  = (mu!...)/mu = !...= QP


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	11




 
\	FORCE
\






F



When t = 0, Tw, 
2Tw ... , the wave 
form is a cosine 
curve with crests at 
x = 0, Lw, 2Lw, · · ·. 
When t =
½ Tw, ¾ Tw, • • •, 
the form is the 
negative of the first 
form, with troughs at 
x = 0, Lw, • • •. 
When t = ¼ Tw,
¾ Tw,  • • • ,  the  
surface  is completely  
flat. At inter­
mediate times, the 
surface  has the  
same shape as at t 
= 0, but with 
amplitude 2{ cos 
wt. Thus, the crests 
never move but 
decrease in place 
and become troughs 
after passing 
through zero. This 
is known as a 
stand­ ing wave. 
By adding the 
velocity potentials 
of the two
component 
progressive waves, 
it can be shown that 
the particle velocity 
at x = 0 is always 
vertical, and at x = 
Lwl 4, 3£,.,/ 4, ... , 
(the nodes), the 
velocity is
always horizontal. 
Therefore, the wave 
form is the same as 
it would be if a wall 
were placed at x  =  
0, and, in fact, a 
standing wave is 
generated when a 
progressive regular 
wave is reflected 
from a vertical wall 
perpendicular to its 
direction of advance.
  (b) Wave 
Groups. It is 
frequently observed 
that natural waves 
may appear to exist 
in packets or 
groups, with 
relatively calm 
patches between 
groups. In effect, 
the waves have an 
envelope that itself 
rises and falls with 
time and distance. 
This phenomenon 
is particularly 
characteristic of 
swell waves and is 
of importance in 
wave propagation.
  An idealized wave 
group pattern  can  
be simulated by a 
sum of two 
progressive waves 
of the same am­


Fig. 6 Inertial reactions an water particle in trochoidal wave



  Hence the two triangles are simi"iar and PF, the 
resultant, is in line with CP and normal to the tro­ 
choidal surface. Any particle in the surface is acted 
upon, therefore, by a resultant  pressure force which 
is normal to the surface. The net wave pressure force 
on the particle is equal and opposite to PF. Since no 
tangential force exists, the surface must be one of 
equal pressure.


plitude but with slightly different frequencies, 
moving in the same direction. Thus,

 
= 2f cos ½[ (k1 + k2)X - (w1 + w2)t ]
        cos½ [ (k1-	kJx  -   (w1 -  w2)t]	(30)
The first cosine factor in this equation has the 
form of a progressive regular wave with wave 
length
Lw = 21TI½ (k1 + 
k2)


2.5	Compound Gravity Waves.    The highly idealized	or


simple harmonic regular wave provides the hydrody-	' 
namic basis for short-term stochastic models of ocean 
waves, but its physical existence is for practical pur­



1	1	1
-Lw=-L1+­L2


poses limited to the laboratory. As described in Section 
2.1, natural waves may usually be considered to be 
sums of many independent regular waves-or surface 
disturbances which can themselves be treated as sums 
of simple regular waves. Before treating these sto­ 
chastic models, it is useful to consider several com­ 
pound wave systems that exhibit important physical 
effects, even though they are just as idealized as the 
regular progressive wave.
  (a) Standing Waves.  Suppose  we  superimpose  
two regular waves of the same amplitude and period, 
but travelling in opposite directions. From Equation
(18) the sum of surface elevations can be written
{(x, t) = f [cos (kx  -  wt) + cos (kx + wt)]	(29)
= 2f cos kx cos wt


Thus, the wavelength of this factor is the 
harmonic mean of the wavelengths of the two 
components. The factor is multiplied by another 
cosine factor with wave­ length,

 
and period

 

Since k 1 and k 2 have been considered to be nearly 
equal, the wavelength of this factor is very large 
com­ pared with the wavelength of the first 
cosine factor. Therefore, it behaves like an 
envelope slowly advanc­ ing. It has the velocity,


12	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 7 Typical recard of irregulor sea taken at a fixed point


Vg = Lgf Tg = 6w
6


µ,, of  wave  
components,  Fig. 7. 
This is equivalent to
assuming that all 
wave components 
travel in the same
direction,  with  µ, = 
0, resulting  in  a  
long-crested ir­


or, in the limit, as 6w, 6k approach zero,
V =	dw=	d(kVc)=   V	k dVc
g	dk	dk	c+	dk




(31)


regular wave observed at a fixed point. Later 
the ef­ fects of wave direction and moving 
point of observation will be considered. 
Following St. Denis and Pierson (1953), each 
of the large number of wave com­


This is known as the group velocity. When the water 
is very deep its value approaches Ve I 2, or one-half the 
celerity of the progressive waves under the envelope. 
If a particular wave crest is followed, starting at the 
rear of a group, it will move forward through the 
group, growing to a peak value, and then shrink and 
disappear as it approaches the leading boundary of the 
group. In the case of shallow water, the group velocity 
approaches Ve. In this case, individual waves maintain 
their identity within the group, which advances at wave 
celerity without change in wave form.
  This model of groups is idealized, but group velocity 
and group behavior are important aspects of wave 
propagation. A wave group can be considered a con­ 
centration of wave energy, and group velocity is the 
velocity of advance of wave energy.
  Studies of the statistical characteristics of wave 
groups under real conditions in the open ocean have 
been reported by Kimura (1980), Longuet-Higgins 
(1984) and others.
  An important practical consequence of wave group 
behavior is that the time required for the wave energy 
of a given frequency to arrive (in deep water) at a 
specific location is twice that which would be estimated 
from wave celerity.
2.6	Waves in the Open Ocean.
  (a)	A short-term model with constant amplitude 
components. A conceptual model to describe ocean 
waves has been presented in Section 2.1. It is possible 
to give the short-term model more precise mathemat­ 
ical form at this point, one that has become extremely 
useful in the treatment of ship motions in natural en­ 
vironments. As previously explained, the wave system 
in the neighborhood of a particular place and time is 
assumed to be the sum of many regular waves, each 
progressing in its own direction and celerity. (The 
changing long-term situation is discussed in Section 
2.9).
  It is convenient to begin with the simple case of the 
wave pattern observed at  a  fixed  point (x  = 0,  y  = 
0), neglecting consideration of the different directions,


ponents is assumed to have a definite frequency and 
a random phase angle. The form for the equation of 
any component wave is as given in Equation (25),

(;(t)  = f; COS  (-w;t + E;)	(32)
where t is a component amplitude corresponding to 
wave frequency w;, and E; is the random phase angle. 
The total wave system is then assumed to be a sum­ 
mation  of  many  (theoretically an  infinite  number) of
independent components,
((t) = Lt	cos (-w;t + e;)	(33)
i
It has been found convenient to define these wave 
components in terms of a function known as a vari­ 
ance spectrum, S(w). This function is also referred to 
as a point spectrum, since the wave is observed at a 
fixed point without consideration of the directions of 
component waves. At any particular wave frequency, 
w;, the variance of all the wave components within a 
small finite frequency band, 6w, centered upon w; is 
given by
                         (34)
Finally, in the limit as 6w ..... 0 this reduces to the var­ 
iance of a single infinitesimal harmonic component.
  It has been shown in Section 2.2 that for a simple, 
regular wave (one cycle or an infinite time)
((;(t)2)  = ½ f;2	(35)
Hence, if it is desired to  visualize the amplitudes  of 
the wave components, we can substitute Equation (35) 
in (34), so that
½ 't/ = S(w;) 6w
and a component amplitude is
t; =	2 S(w;) 6w	(36)
in the limit as 6w approaches zero. Of course, it cannot 
be evaluated directly, but it can be approximated  when


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	13



6w is taken to be very small. See Fig. 8.
  More important than the component amplitudes, 
however, is the total variance of the wave system, 
usually designated E, which is a good measure of the 
severity of the sea.
E = (( ( t) 2
The components on the right-hand side of (33) have 
been assumed to be independent random variables by 
virtue of their random phases. Since, as noted in Sec­ 
tion 2.1, the variance of the sum of a large number of 
independent random variables approaches the sum of 
the variances of these variables, Equation (2) gives
E = ({(t)2) = L (t(t)2)
i
or integrating Equation (34) and substituting,



  It should be emphasized that the component waves 
are not directly visible either at sea or in a wave 
record. However, the variance spectrum defining these 
com­ ponents can be obtained from a wave record by 
ap­ plying the techniques of generalized harmonic 
analysis (Wiener, 1930, 1949), provided that the record 
is long enough (15 to 20 min) and that sea conditions 
remain steady. Such records have been obtained 
mainly by means of shipborne recorders aboard 
stationary ves­ sels (such as weather ships). Airborne 
laser and radar scanning have also been used, and radar 
altimeters on spacecraft are under development 
(Pierson, 1974).
  In the analysis procedure developed by Tukey 
(1949) and Rice (1945 and 1954) points are first read 
from the record at equal increments of time. Then the 
autocor­ relation function of the data sample is 
obtained by evaluating the integral


E = i"' S(w)dw



(37)


iT((t) . {(t  + T) 
dt


That is, the area under the spectrum is equal to the 
variance, E, of the wave system.
  Referring to the typical plot of a  variance spectrum 
at a point (Fig. 8), the areas of the elemental rectan­ 
gles, S(w;) 6w, may be seen from (34) to define the 
variances of the wave components. Strictly speaking, 
the foregoing interpretation of the spectrum  in  terms 
of component waves is valid only for the limiting case 
6w ..... 0 and the number of component_s ..... 00 •
  By Equation (36) the elemental rectangles also define 
the amplitudes of the components in the limit. How­ 
ever, when a large number of components is assumed, 
say 15 or 20, a fair finite-sum model of a unidirectional 
(long-crested) sea is obtained. (A multi-directional, 
short-crested, sea requires many more). Since any par­ 
ticular rectangle represents the  variance  in that  band 
of frequencies, a wave of the indicated finite amplitude 
would have the same  variance as the infinite  number 
of components within that band. Hence, the algebraic 
addition of these 15 or 20 component waves, shown at 
the bottom of Fig. 8, will give a pattern that has the 
same total variance and closely resembles the record 
from which the spectrum was obtained. It will also



for discrete values of time lag, r. The raw point 
spec­ trum is then obtained by taking the Fourier 
cosine transform of the autocorrelation function. 
Some


o.l,

 

w.- 	::::::-----,.,,_..-.--------------------=-.,,.----=- ---- ---...-=-

 


have many of the same statistical properties. However,


Ws 	;;;;;---_ _.------- ---....,_::,,,.,..... _-_-_-_-_;;;;.---,:;;:;-=-.,......,...----=---


we can never match the record exactly, no matter how 
many components are assumed, for although an arti­


w, ...:::::::.:.:- -------------... 


...


ficial wave can be made to repeat itself, a real ocean


1,,,       ............,---=---------==---- 	,,.-::::-:---.,...... 	
 


wave record never does so. This is actually no handi­ 
cap, for it is statistical information that we ultimately 
need for application to ship design.
It is of interest to plot five or more sine curves


w,.. .....,,....---....... .....-:::-:--,........	..,.-----,,.,.,.<......---'_...­
c.>, -...	.....,_...---...... .,--....,.,c..::::.:---,.----.,....	,...­
w•..,===-,.,."'----"'.-----.,'----""	.....'-=-"':e---..---=---',...........,,,
W,1..     ..--==-,,,,	_........._ --=--= ,_.---....., .. . ,.-::::-,,, ::..::,;..:::a "'"­
tJ."  .....	..,.....	..,---,...	,,--....,"-
w,1 "--"rd""""""-	-._.        ,.,--....._.....,:c:.-,.,      ,.,,......._.,,--,.'--""'g-,,'-""..,,..


through several cycles and to add successive ordinates 
algebraically or to carry out the same procedure on 
an electronic computer. The resulting curve will dem­ 
onstrate clearly that the sum of even a small number 
of regular sine waves is an irregular pattern, provided 
that the component waves are in random phase.


w,, ,.........		,............,..--,.,,._
SCALE OF TIME OR DISTANCE

(bl COMPONENT WAVES

Fig. 8 Typical variance spectrum of waves, showing approximation by a
finite  sum  of components


14	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




1201-------,------,----- ------,-




i
1I ra,t=1=:+=:::::=FS1WELL
I  
80i------,-'-++-t--t----t---+-----+------
I
I
I	,
I	I	I
I	I	I
             

Unit Energy  = ½ pgf2
	(2
1)
Equations (34) and (35) show that the variance of 
the wave components within a band of frequencies, 
6(J), is ( t ;( t) 2 )  = S((J);) 6(J) = ½ f2	(38)
which differs only by a factor of pg from the unit 
energy of Equation (21). Hence, the spectrum S((J)), 
which describes the allocation of the variance of a 
wave system among components can also be 
considered an allocation of Energy/ pg. For this 
reason, it is some­
times called, somewhat loosely, the energy spectrum.


so	:  +-fl• •+---.+-------+------+-

 


Note that if the sea were unidirectional, or long­


...-'


I	\	I
:
	
•\
	
I
I	I	I
I	I


c
r
e
s
t
e
d
,
 
t
h
e
 
p
o
i
n
t
 
s
p
e
c
t
r
u
m
,
 
t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
d
i
r
e
c
­
 
t
i
o
n
,
 
w
o
u
l
d
 
b
e
 
a
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
t
e
 
s
t
a
t
i
s
t
i
c
a
l
 
d
e
f
i
n
i
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 		seaway, assuming it to be a Gaussian random process,


3401- ·1-1--+-!- ----,H,..,-. -!-------


with zero mean. This condition is sometimes 
approxi­



).,
VI
N


!
 
\
f
	
'
,
201-
+--
+-if-
Tl+-
-
''...., 
-+-
_..+-
......+--
.l"----
+---
Y-----
+-


m
a
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
n
a
t
u
r
e
 
w
h
e
n
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
e
d
o
m
i
n
a
n
t
 
w
a
v
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
f
r
o
m
 
a
 
s
i
n
g
l
e
 
d
i
s
t
a
n
t
 
s
t
o
r
m
.
  A
l
t
h
o
u
g
h
 
t
h
e
 
v
a
r
i
a
n
c
e
 
E
,
 
o
b
t
a
i
n
e
d
 
f
r
o
m
 
a
 
p
o
i
n
t
 
s
p
e
c
­
 
t
r
u
m
 
i
s
 
a
 
g
o
o
d
 
m
e
a
s
u
r
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y
 
o
f
 
a
n
y
 
s
e
a
,
 
i
t
 
w
i
l
l
 
b
e
 
s
h
o
w
n
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
e
a
w
a
y
 
c
a
n
 
b
e
 
m
o
r
e
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
t
e
l
y
 
c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
i
z
e
d
 
b
y
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
m
p
o
n
e
n
t
 
w
a
v
e
 
d
i
­
 
r
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
b
y
 
m
e
a
n
s
 
o
f
 
a
 
d
i
r
e
c
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
s
p
e
c
t
r
u
m
.
 
C
o
m
i
n
g


0.5	1.0	1.5
CJ = 2 lT/T (sEc"')


2.0


now to this more general three-
dimensional case, a single wave train is 
described by Equation (24). The


Fig. 9 Typical sea spectra, winds from 24 to 47 knots (Moskowitz, et al,
1962)

"smoothing" of the raw spectrum is desirable to im­ 
prove the accuracy of the estimate, involving one of 
several smoothing functions. Finally, the theory pro­ 
vides a means of evaluating the accuracy, that is, de­ 
fining the confidence bands of the spectral estimates, 
taking account of the sampling interval 6t, the number 
of data points in the sample, and the number of lags. 
(The procedure is summarized by Korvin-Kroukovsky
(1961), and discussed in detail by Bendat and Piersol 
(1971).


general equation for the total wave system of com­ 
ponents moving in different directions, µ, is then
t(x, y, t) = LL ti cos [k;(x cos /Li
i j
+ y sin µ,i) - (J);t + E;J (39)
In a manner similar to the case of the point spectrum, 
the wave elevation may be considered at a point (x  = 
0; y = 0), but component wave direction, µ,, must still 
be accounted for. Hence,
t(t) = LL {;;COS (-(J);t + E;;)	(40)
i    i


  The foregoing operations can be readily carried out 
on a digital computer. However, in recent years, it has 
been found to be more expeditious to employ standard 
Fast Fourier programs, which also provide superior 
resolution (Bendat and Piersol, 1971). The effects of 
using different analysis methods on the same data are 
considered by Donelan and Pierson (1983). Many ex­


and	  
2
)
i j


'ij
= f'f"S((J), µ,) dµ,d(J)	(41)


amples of point spectra have been derived from ocean 
wave records. Several of these are shown in Fig. 9.
  It should be noted that some authors  prefer to use 
a spectrum form based on wave period rather than 
frequency, since it is more consistent with wave ob­ 
servations and when plotted gives more emphasis to 
the important low frequencies and less to the less 
important high frequencies.
  It has been shown in Section 2.2  that  energy  per 
unit surface area in a simple harmonic wave is pro­ 
portional to the square of the amplitude, or, more spe­ 
cifically,


where the variance E, as previously noted, is an im­ 
portant statistical parameter, and the components are 
defined by both frequency, (J), and direction, µ,, with 
i and j referring to specific values of (J) and µ,, 
respec­ tively, and the directional spectrum S((J), µ,) 
defines the allocation by frequency and direction of 
the variances of the components of the wave system. 
Each of the infinite number of wave components is 
assumed  to have a definite frequency and direction, 
with random phase angle. The component amplitudes  
are  defined for the incremental areas, 6(J)6µ,, in the 
limit as 6(J) and 6µ - 0, when




so•



























so•



























Fig. 10 Typical directional sea specira


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	15


 
                        
(42)
  Thus, S(w, µ) defines 
the sea state more 
completely than the point 
spectrum. See Fig. lO(a) 
which can be considered 
an idealized contour plot 
of a three-dimen­ sional 
figure in which the axis 
perpendicular to the paper 
represents S(w, µ). A 
typical directional spec­ 
trum obtained from wave 
buoy records is  shown  in 
Fig. lO(b) (Canham, et al, 
1962). An alternate form 
of plotting is given in Fig. 
11. The latter can be 
considered to represent the 
long-crested irregular 
wave trains of different 
average directions that 
superimpose to form the 
short-crested sea in the 
limit as 6µ , 0.
  Integrating the 
directional spectrum, 
Equation (41), with 
respect to µ leads to
I® S(w) dw = 
½	t/ = E	(43)
where S(w) is the point 
spectrum previously 
discussed.
  (b)	Generational 
Theory of  Ocean  Waves. 
Another less simple 
stochastic model of ocean 
waves takes account of the 
process  of  generating  a  
storm sea by assuming that 
the separate disturbances 
gen­ erated in the storm 
areas, as discussed in 
Section 2.1, are in the 
form of wave groups 
rather than  simple trains 
of regular waves. These 
component systems 
superimpose on one 
another and propagate 
away from the generating 
area. The final result of 
this approach would be a 
mathematical model that 
differs from the simpler 
case in that Equation (39) 
requires another factor  
representing  a  wave  
component  of  fixed  fre­
quency, w -a carrier in 
electronics terminology-and
the substitution of (w; - w) 
for w; to account for the 
slow amplitude 
modulation. 5
  The examples of 
directional spectra shown 
in Figs. 10 and 11 apply 
equally to the present 
model  and  to the simpler 
one previously given, but 
in the present case the 
spectra will change slowly 
with time.
  Both models are local, 
in the sense that they 
describe the statistical 
behavior of storm waves in 
the imme­ diate 
neighborhood of a 
geographical point. 
However, the first model 
has the form of a 
stationary or statis­ tically 
constant sea over all space 
and time. The second 
model readily allows for 
changes due  to such  
effects as fetch and 
duration. In the first 
model, any reali­ zation 
based upon a discrete set 
of sine waves  will have a 
random but constant phase 
between compo­ nents of 
the same frequency but 
different directions, which 
is inconsistent with the 
second model. It should be 
noted that any realization 
based upon discrete sine 
waves, even if a large 
number of components is 
as­ sumed, may lead to 
erroneous correlations 
among ship responses 
(phase between heave and 
pitch, for ex­ ample). 
While the simple statistical 
parameters will


   5 (This model, conceived by 
Dr. W.E. Cummins, has not been 
de­ veloped in detail.-Ed.)


16	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


0,2	0.3	0.4	Q.5	0.6  (A}	0.7	0.8	0.9	1.0	I.I

Fig. 11 Angular components of directional sea spectrum




generally be identical between the two models, more 
complex measures that involve two or more responses


and the variance has been shown to be E. The prob­ 
ability density function for ((t) is then


may behave quite differently. Further treatment of this 
question is beyond the scope of the di cussion  here, 
and in fact it is an area of controversy and continuing


PW=


1
m:e, exp ( - t / 2E )
-y2'1TE



(44)


research. This second model is discussed, not just to 
provide a better understanding of the storm sea, but 
to lay a foundation for treating complex ship-wave 
interaction.
  (c)	Characteristics of point spectra. A typical rec­ 
ord of waves observed at a fixed point is a continuous 
irregular function of time, such as Fig. 7, that never 
repeats itself exactly. The continuous line in Fig. 12 
might represent a segment of such a record of length
T. If it is assumed to be a zero-mean process, its var­ 
iance is given mathematically by
1	T/2
(((t)2) =	T iT/2 (2(t) dt	(22)
Therefore, the va:riance can be approximated by taking 
measurements of a large number of closely spaced 
deviations from the mean line, squaring them and in­ 
tegrating numerically. But we have seen that the area 
under the point spectrum, E, is also equal to the var­ 
iance of the process (Equation 37). Hence, if the spec­ 
trum is known, the variance can be easily obtained by 
integrating the spectrum. Alternatively, if one com­ 
putes the variance directly from the wave record one 
obtains the area under the unknown spectrum, but not 
its shape.
  A normal distribution is completely defined when the 
mean and variance are known. The mean here is zero,


the familiar bell-shaped curve shown in Fig. 13.
  For most practical purposes, however, we are 
more interested in the statistics of visible or 
"apparent" properties of the wave record than in its 
Gaussian properties or its invisible component 
waves. Fortu­ nately, the shape of the spectrum 
supplies a great deal of useful information about the 
visible characteristics of the ocean wave system to 
which it corresponds.
  As mathematical functions, spectra are always non­ 
negative (since they represent a squared quantity: the 
variance), but with a finite area, E. An infinite area 
would imply an infinite mean square surface displace­ 
ment. Point spectra (Figs. 8 and 9) rise to one or more 
peaks or modes, and then vanish at very high fre­ 
quencies. The modal frequency corresponding to the 
highest peak of a spectrum is designated wm, and the 
corresponding period, 27T / wm is designated Tm. The 
frequency of greatest variance density is wm, and it is 
frequently used as an identifying parameter, together 
with E, in analyses using sets of spectra.  The  period 
Tm is sometimes called the most probable period, but 
this is an erroneous concept, as the point spectrum is 
not in any sense a probability density function. While 
this parameter has intuitive significance, it should be 
used with caution in discussion of spectra derived 
from wave records. It can be shown to have poor 
sampling characteristics, since its precise value 
depends solely


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	17



upon the variation of S(w) in the immediate neighbor­ 
hood of wm, and the small errors that are  inherent  in 
the calculation from a specific wave record  can result 
in large shifts in the position of the peak.
  More meaningful frequency parameters can be ob­ 
tained from the set of moments, which depend on 
spectrum shape
i"'



  There are a number of descriptive parameters that 
can be computed from the spectral moments, which are 
valuable for characterizing the visual appearance of the 
wave record. These include the zero-crossing period 
(average time interval between zero upcross­ ings), 
average peak-to-peak period, average slope, av­ erage 
wavelength, and average wave height (vertical distance, 
trough  to crest). The quantities  being aver­
aged are illustrated  in the sample time record shown


mn =


w" S(w) dw


(45)


in Fig. 12, except for 
wave slope which is not 
defined in a time 
record.


where  n is an integer.  In  particular, the area, m0  ,     is 
the variance or E. These moments have better-behaved 
statistical sampling characteristics than Tm, as they 
depend upon all values of S(w). The moments m 2 and


Average period of component waves,
T _1 = i"' T S(w) dw/ i"' S(w) dw


m 4 have a dynamic significance that can be shown by 
differentiating Equation (33) with respect to time.


= 2,r m _/ m 0


(49)


t (t) = L - w; t sin [w;t + E;]
= L - w; t cos [w;t + (E; - i)]	(46)
  

Period corresponding to average frequency of com­ ponent 
waves,
.,	-1
T1       = 21r([	w S(w) dwl m 0)


By analogy with Equations (35) and (36), giving the 
component amplitude of wave elevation and its vari­


= 21rm



0 / m1



(50)


ance, the amplitude of component vertical velocity 
must be w;"[; and the variance of component velocity


Average period between zero upcrossings of {(t),
see Price and Bishop (1974),


((w; {;)2


= ½ (w; f ;) 2 = (w/ 
S(w;)) 8w


(51)


Hence, the spectrum of velocity, t (t), is seen to be 
w2 S(w).  Similarly,  the  spectrum   Qf  acceleration, 
t (t), is w4 S(w). Therefore,
m 2   = ( t ( t ) 2 )	(47)
  

Average period between peaks (maxima) or hollows 
(minima),
                           (52)
A statistical measure of the slope of the wave sur­


m   =  ( t ( t) 2)	(48)


face {' is its variance,













 	MEAN	
SURFACE LEVEL O







 


-T/2	0



.....



TIME


T/2


 

Fig. 12 Typical wave record at a fixed point, with definitions of terms


18	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE





where




<r>2 
=



(!Y



+ (!;Y


(53)


maxima, 
negative 
minima, 
and 
positive 
minima, 
as il­ 
lustrated 
in Fig. 
12.
  T
he 
max
ima 
of 
the 
proc
ess 
are 
rand
om 
vari
able
s, . 
that 
are 
deri
vabl
e 
fro
m 
the 
proc
ess. 
The 
theo
ry 
for 
the 
prob
abili
ty 
dens
ity 
of 
all 
max
ima 
(or 
mini
ma) 
of a 
stati
onar
y 
zero
-
mea
n 
Gau
ssia
n 
proc
ess 
was 
first


See Section 2.7 and Cummins and Bales (1980).
  Average wave length between zero up-crossings 
(Price and Bishop, 1974),
                             (54)
  In considering visual wave amplitudes and heights, 
we note first that, as a consequence of the zero-mean 
Gaussian assumption, the process is statistically sym­ 
metrical about the zero line. For example, in the long 
run the average positive deviation from zero is equal 
to the average negative deviation. More importantly, 
in the present context, the Gaussian property requires 
that the maxima and minima of a record also be sta­ 
tistically symmetrical.
  In the wave and ship response processes of interest 
the qualitative behavior sketched in Fig. 12 is not un­ 
common; that is, small short-period oscillations some­ 
times ride on long-period oscillations. Thus the 
possibility arises that there can be more than one max­ 
imum in an excursion of the process above zero. This 
necessarily means that there can also be minima that


worked out by Rice (1945), and extensively 
discussed by Cartwright, et al (1956). The most 
compact form of the result is obtained by 
normalizing the dimensional
maxima by .Jrno = -JE (the root-mean-square value of
the process):
E  = V.fino
Then the probability density of the non-dimensional 
maxima, E, may be written (Cartwright, et al, 1956)
pfa)  = -     {E exp [ -  (E IE)2/ 2]
J2m
+ E	exp [-  E2 / 2] cf>(E IE)}	(55)
where the so-called spectral broadness parameter E,
is
E=	 
and the function, cf>(E / E), is defined:


are positive. Thus, in contrast to the usual "givens"	 	


1E.,/1=7/E


about maxima and minima of sinusoids; we have the 
prospect of dealing with positive maxima, negative


cf>(E.,Jl -	E 2 I E) =


exp [ - v2 / 2] dv.




0.80




0.60
11,1
z
11,1
a:
a:
u::>
(J
o  04.0

ff: 0.20






0
-1.0	0
DEVIATIONS FROM MEAN




1.0	2.0


Fig. 13  Frequency  of  occurrence  of  deviations  from  mean  value  of  points 
an a wave record


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	19



0.20

w
0z
aw:
a:

II.
0 0.10

w
::,
i



DOUBLE WAVE AMPLITUDE
Fig. 14 Typical density function from Korvin-Kroukovsky (1961), of wave 
amplitudes in record of irregular waves in a model basin



where v is a dummy variable.
  The most important  thing  to note  about  the  result 
is that the probability density of maxima is completely 
defined (through E' and E) by the first three even spec­ 
tral moments, m0 , m2 , and m 4 • Once the spectrum is 
known, the moments can be worked out, and the prob­ 
ability function of the maxima is defined. Recalling 
Equations (51) and (52), E can be expressed as:

                          (56)
and it can be seen that this parameter is related to the 
ratio of the average period between peaks and the 
average period between zero up-crossings. When there 
are no multiple maxima in any excursions of the proc­
ess above or below zero, Tc = T., E = 0, and the 
spectrum is called narrow band. When E = 0 is sub­ 
stituted into Equation (55) the result is:
p(E') = E' exp [ - E: 2 / 2]	(57)
which is a non-dimensional form of the Rayleigh den­ 
sity function shown in Fig. 14. Conversely, when there 
are a very large number of maxima within each ex­ 
cursion of the process above or below zero, Tc << T, 
and E  ....  1; the spectrum is considered  broad.6  Substi­ 
tution of E = 1 into Equation (55) yields a non-dimen­ 
sional Gaussian density function:
1


Essentially, the probability density functions for 
the maxima of the process given by Equation (55) 
make a continuous transition from the Rayleigh 
to the Gaus­ sian density functions, dependent 
upon the relative broadness of the spectrum.
  Another measure of magnitude customarily used 
is the estimate of the average value of the 1 / nth 
highest maxima of the process. To illustrate the 
idea, if 1000 maxima were measured from  a  
sample,  the  average of the 1 / 10th highest would 
be obtained by first iden­ tifying the highest 100 
maxima and then averaging them. The analogous 
estimate from the theory is il­ lustrated by Fig. 15, 
which represents a probability density of maxima, 
p(E'). The shaded area in the tail represents a 
probability (1/ n) that a maximum will exceed E'11n . 
Mathematically this is written:






-p(:S)


p(E)  = - -   exp [ -  E 2 / 2]	(58)

. I
I



 
6 Note that a white noise spectrum of infinite broadness has an
E of only¾.


S  i/n
Fig. 15 Definition of (E,,.) in relation top (El


20	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

broadness parameters, E, less than 0.5 or 0.6 the de­ 
pendence of ( E1, ) and (E 11 ) on E is relatively small. 
In this range of E if the value of ('.:1n1 ) is taken as
that for the narrow-band case (E = 0) the error com­
mitted is typically less than 10 percent. Fortunately, 
for most cases of interest (especially ship responses) 
the broadness parameter is less than 0.6. In the event 
a double amplitude is required (as wave height), the 
values for a narrow-band process are doubled.
  Thus various statistical values of wave  properties 
can be calculated from E  =  m 0  by taking  advantage 
of the fact that the peak-to-trough wave heights,  as 
well as maxima, of a record follow approximately a 
Rayleigh density function. (See Fig. 14). For this pur­ 
pose, from Equation (57), the probability density func­ 
tion of the wave height, hw (Fig. 12), may be written
           p(hw) = :Eexp (-hu.218E)	(61) 
From this law, useful  parameters are:		_
Average apparent wave height, crest to trough (2{)



o...._  



_._ 	...._  



_._ _


is,



(hw) 
= 
2.5E 
112


o	M	M	M
E
Fig. 16 Graphs of ( E'11 . ) the average of the 1/nth highest maxima as a 
function of£, for n = 1,2,3,5, and 10 (Korvin-Kroukavsky, 1961)


00


or average amplitude
(f)	= l. 25E 112
Similarly, the average of the½ highest waves, or 
sig­ nificant height:


Prob [E > E11n] = ¾ =




=vn


p(E) dE


(59)	And the average of the 
½o highest waves is
1
1
 
2


Given an expression for p(E) [Equations (55), (57), (58)],


(   (  h  w)  1      )      =   5.1E


the  value of::1,n may be worked out numerically from 
Equation (59). The statistical mean value of the values 
of :: above :: 11n is then:
00
  

As explained in Section 4, all of the above 
relations apply also to most ship responses to 
ocean waves. These measures are of a  
magnitude  that would often be noticed in a 
relatively short observation of the proc­


(E11n) = n




=11n


E p(E) dE


(60)


ess. There are 
occasions, 
however, when 
it is desired to 
estimate 
magnitudes of 
wave or 
response 
maxima that 
are unlikely to 
be exceeded 
very often; that 
is, to


which is the abscissa of the centroid of the shaded area 
in the figure, and the statistic desired.
  Because the parameters in Equation (55) are non­ 
dimensional, the process just outlined can be per­ 
formed numerically once for all as a function of :: and
E. The result is given in Fig. 16 (Cartwright, et al 1956). 
To illustrate practical use, if the- spectral broadness 
parameter, E = 0.8, and the average of the¼ highest  
is desired, (E115) ::::: 2.0, and in this case the average
of the¼ highest dimensional maxima is 2.0.fino.
  The most common practical measure of wave (or 
response) magnitude is the significant  amplitude. 
This is taken to be the average of the½ highest max­ 
ima. Another common measure is the average of the 
tenth highest. It will be noted from Fig. 16 that for


estimate extremes. The statistical theory of 
extreme values used in conjunction with the 
narrow-band as­ sumption results in the 
estimates for the expected highest in a sample 
of N successive wave heights,
N = 100,	6.5E 112
N = 1000,	7.7E 112
N = 10,000,	8.9E 112
However, if a large number of samples of the 
stated size are taken, 5 percent of them 
would be expected to have maximum heights 
as follows:
N = 100,	7.8E112
N = 1000,  8.9 E 112
  Since the heights given were arrived at by 
doubling the results for maxima, estimated 
values of the cor-


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	21


responding amplitudes may be obtained by halving the 
numbers given above.
  (d)	Characteristics of directional spectra. All of 
the parameters that have been defined for point spec­ 
tra apply equally well for directional spectra, but ad­ 
ditional parameters are needed to characterize the 
directional qualities. In most applications it is conve­



S(w, µ.) = S(w) M(µ.)	(62)

where S(w) is the point spectrum and M(µ.) is called the 
spreading function. It is common practice to take

M(µ.) = 1-   cosn      (/-J,'°) -1T  for -µ..	/J-w	µ..


nient to assume that S(w, µ.) is separable into two 
factors, one a function of frequency and one a function 
of direction:


µ..	µ.. 2
= 0 elsewhere






-3...









....



·	..a..


0	0.2	0.4	0.6
(A>


Q8	1.Q
	L2


(I)	N
GI
•
3
fl)



0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8	1.0	1.2
(A)






r--
I



t02	0	•Q2	-0.4	-0.6
lnw


-0.8


-1.0	-IZ


1.2	1.0	Q9'	0.8	Q7	0.6	Q5	0.45	Q4


Q35	0.3


fig. 17    Transformations of  sea spectra


22	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



where µw is the angle between a wave component and 
the dominant wave direction and µ. is the  angular 
range of components on either side of the dominant 
wave direction. When n is taken as 2 andµ. as 90 deg, 
this is called a cosine-squared or cos2 spreading func­ 
tion. Then


Similarly, Note that


Sz(w, µ)  = w 4   cos2µ S(w, µ) / g2	(65a)

Sy(w, µ)  = w4  sin 2µ S(w, µ)/ g2	(65b)


2	s,.(w, µ) = Sx + Sy  = w4 S(w, µ)/ g2	(65c)


M(µ) = - cos2µ
71'


(63)


The function


s,.(w,


µ) cannot be considered the spec­


which is generally used pending availability of better 
data.
  A two-dimensional spectrum is much more difficult 
to obtain at sea than a simple point spectrum, and only 
a few are presently available. One method involves a 
lengthy numerical autocorrelation analysis of stereo­ 
photographs (Chase, et al, 1960). Another method 
makes use of a buoy that records wave slopes as  well 
as directions (Canham, et al, 1962). A third employs a 
fixed array of wave height recorders (Barber, 1963; 
Oakley, 1974). For further developments in directional 
spectra see Mitsuyasu (1975) and Hasselmann, et al 
(1976).
  2.7	Wave Slope and the Slope Spectrum. Many ma­ 
rine systems (ships, platforms) are more sensitive to 
wave slope in certain modes of response than to wave 
height. Roll is an obvious example. But slope of a short­ 
crested sea is a vector quantity since it has two per­ 
pendicular components,

at and at 
ax	ay
and must be treated somewhat differently from the 
scalars  that  have  been  discussed   to  this  point.  The
magnitude  of  the slope,  r, is  never  negative.  It is
easiest to discuss slope in terms of its components. 
Starting with Equation (39),
t(x, y, t) = LL f;i cos [k;(x cos µi
i    j

 

Then
     = - iL f;i k; cos µi X
(T.t,	t J
sin [k;(X cos µi + y sin µi) - w;t + E;j]
The origin is a typical point, so let x, y be zero. Noting 
that k; = w/lg.
:   =	t (t;   w;2 cos µ/  g)  sin (w;t -   E;;)	(64)
The coefficients in the summation for at I ax are those 
of the summation for t multiplied by w;2 cos µ/ g. 
Therefore, since the spectrum is proportional to the 
square of the coefficients, at I ax has the spectrum


trum of the slope of a short-crested sea but it can be 
considered the density function of the mean-square absolute 
slope over the w, µ plane, associated with the variance (or 
displacement) spectrum S(w, µ). If the wave spectrum is 
unidirectional (long-crested), say from the x direction,
Sr(w)  = Sx(w)  = w 4S ,(w )I g2	(66)
and Sr can be considered the point spectrum of the slope 
in the direction of the source of th ave s!stem, or simply a 
slope spectrum. Note that 1t 1s eqmvalent also to the 
vertical acceleration spectrum, except for the factor 1 / g 2 • 
A sample variance spectrum and the corresponding wave-
slope spectrum are shown in Fig. 17(a) and (b). An 
interesting feature of_ the slope sp c­ trum is that it is fairly 
uniform at the high frequencies beyond the peak of the 
variance spe tru . Th s, any marine system response mode 
that 1s primarily sen­ sitive to wave slope may be 
insensitive to the locat on of the peak of the displacement 
spectrum (See Section 4). Note that the variance of wave 
slope is
f Sr(w) dw = m / g 2
  Slope is dimensionless, and for certain  purposes it   is 
desirable to have a dimensionless plot of the slope spectrum. 
This can be achieved by plotting it against the logarithm to 
base e, In w. To make this transfor­ mation, we must first 
determine the increment on  the In w scale, 6(ln w), 
corresponding to 8w.
6(ln w)=   d(ln w) 8w =	6w
dw	w
Then, for an incremental area to be the same in both 
systems,
S, (In w)  _	(  S(w))  _  w5S (w)   ( 67)
The transformed spectrum in log-slope form is shown in 
Fig. 17(c), where it w_ill be no d hat_ the range of general 
interest to us 1s negative m sign, and that short waves are 
to the left.
2.8	Frequency-of-Encounter  Spectrum.	Up to this
point, the discussion of waves and wave_ spectra as been 
with respect to a fixed reference pomt. The time history of 
waves encountered by a moving point  (a ship under way, for 
example) is significantly mo?,ified by the Doppler Shift in 
the component frequencies of the wave system. Suppose an x 
0 , Yo coordinate system,


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	23


fixed in relation to 1J}e earth, and a regular progressive 
wave of amplitude t and wave number, k, propagating 
in a direction µ relative to the x0-axis. In the fixed 
coordinate system the free surface of the wave field 
is described by (24):


=E =


"'2,r
0 0


S(w., µ,) dµ, dw.


t(xo, Yo, t) = f cos [ k(x0 cos µ
                + Yo sin µ)  -   wt + E]	(24)
Now suppose further that a ship proceeds in the di­ 
rection of the x0-axis at constant velocity U0 , and we 
wish to describe the wave field as would be observed 
from the moving ship. We assume a moving, x-y co­ 
ordinate system with origin in the ship and whose x­ 
axis is aligned with the fixed x 0-axis. Since the location 
of the ship at any instant, t, is U0 t , the relation be­ 
tween the two coordinate systems is:
X 0 = X + Uot
Yo= Y
Substituting in Equation (24) the expression for the 
wave field as seen from the moving ship becomes: 
t(x, y, t) = f cos [kx cos µ + ky sin µ
- (w - kU 0 COS µ)t + E] (68)
The coefficient of tin Equation (68) defines afrequency 
of encounter, w., and noting that k = w2 I g for deep 
water:


and we may identify the spectrum of encounter as before 
as a limit as 6w. and 6µ. approach zero:
        S[(w.);j,  µi] = ½f//6w,6µ	(72) 
Noting that:
Bw. = (_1	2w U  cos µ)6 w
we can write
    S(w., µ)  = S(w, µ)/(1 -   (2wU0/    g) cos µ]	(73)
Care must be taken in using this relation,  for  there may 
be three points in the w, µ, plane corresponding
to any w., µ when  U0  cos µ, is negative. Also, S(w., µ)
will  have  a  pole  at  the  point  corresponding  to w =
-  g / 2U0   cos µ  as  6w,-+  0 for  finite  6w, unless S(w,
µ) = 0 at this point.
While S(w., µ) is the spectrum actually experienced


w 2 U0 cosµ



(69)


Ct)• = Ct) -  -       g--


If  attention  is  fixed  upon  the  wave  elevation at  a	J
single point relative to the ship, the moving coordinate






...


positions, x and y, may be taken to be zero without 
loss of generality, and then, with Equation (69), the 
wave elevation that would be sensed at a point in the 
moving ship becomes:
        t.(t; µ, U0 ,   k)  =  I cos [E -  w,t]	(70)
where the notation in the argument denotes that the 
function of time depends upon wave direction, ship 
speed, and wave number as parameters defining w•.
  In a short-crested sea, the wave field relative to fixed 
coordinates has been approximated as a superposition 
of many components having different wave numbers 
and directions, Equation (39). Transforming (39) to 
moving coordinates, the wave elevation sensed at a 
point in a ship moving in short-crested seas becomes:
'6(t;  Uo) = LL L cos [E;j-	(w.)iit]	(71)
i j

The variance of this representation of the encountered 
waves is the same as that of waves defined with respect 
to fixed axes because only the point of observation has 
changed. Thus, writing the variance of the encountered 
waves as before:





II)..








w

Fig. 18 Growth and decay of storm sea spectra (ljima, 1957)


24	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



by a moving marine system, the complications can be 
avoided by keeping all calculations in the Cd, J.t plane. 
This can usually be done with little difficulty. Never- 
theless, it is useful to be  aware  of  the  peculiarities 
that the Doppler Shift may produce in the encounter 
spectrum, and the complexities that  they  may lead to 
in the interpretation of the responses of a moving ship. 
These considerations will be discussed further in Sec- 
tion 4.
   2.9	Development and Decay of Spectra. So far we 
have been considering primarily the short-term local 
description of the ocean  under  stationary  conditions 
by means of point spectra, or better, by directional 
spectra. Attention will now be directed to the processes 
of changing wave patterns, as described by their spec- 
tra, in particular the manner in which the point spec- 
trum in a wave generation area grows as the  wind 
blows and how it decays after the  wind has  passed. 
Fig. 18 (Ijima, 1957) shows  a case  of wave growth  as 
a function of wind duration. It can be seen that, at the 
high-frequency end, the spectrum quickly approaches 
an asymptotic curve. Further  energy  generated  in 
these frequencies is dissipated by non-linear processes 
such as wave-breaking. The growth at lower frequen- 
cies is much slower, and the energy required for prop- 
agation at the high group velocities of these wave 
lengths may be more of a limiting factor  to  growth 
than wave-breaking. In any case, it can take  many 
hours before the spectrum reaches  its  limiting  form 
for high wind speeds.
It  is believed that,  for  winds up  to  about  30 knots,
waves frequently reach the fully-developed stage, be- 
yond which there is little change in the spectrum area.


But fully developed seas corresponding to the greater 
wind velocities are found to be less frequent because 
these strong winds do not blow long enough. It should 
be noted that spectra, particularly for high winds, may 
also be limited by the fetch (distance over which the 
wind blows). As has been noted, fetch  is determined 
by the size of the storm  as well as by the presence  of  
a shoreline to windward.
  Winds affect the maintenance and decay of wave 
systems, as well as their generation. A wind that op- 
poses an existing sea will damp it out, quickly or 
slowly, depending on wind velocity and direction. On 
the other hand, a wind continuing to blow steadily 
after developing a typical sea may maintain it 
essentially constant (in statistical terms) for many 
hours. Fig. 18 shows the decline of a spectrum as wind 
dies out and wave dispersion takes effect.
  In the absence of wind, internal friction also results 
in a gradual decrease of wave amplitude. However, 
theory shows that this decay is very slow, particularly 
for wavelengths of, say, 100 ft or longer. This 
explains why swells from severe storms can travel for 
thou- sands of miles with little loss of energy if not 
damped out by an adverse wind. Consequently, new 
storms usually act on water already affected by 
previous storms. A typical condition would be a storm 
sea su- perimposed on a swell, each having a different 
average direction. Theoretically the spectrum of the 
combined disturbance is initially simply the sum of  
the  spectra of the two separate wave trains, which 
gives rise to spectra with double peaks.  Another  
important  effect is the dispersion which occurs as a 
storm wave pattern leaves a generating area. Here, the 
wave energy




 














Table 1-Typical Hindcast Directional Spectrum (Converted to Densities)



Total
Variance	Wave




Wave 
Frequencies 
(hertz)




Spectral 
Densities




  Point 
Spectrum•
Ss2,Cl))
               

T
ime, Date - 
9z, 8 Dee 
66, 
Location - 
58.579N  / 
18.175W	From Each	Directions WDDR - 280.565, WDSP - 56.386 (knots), White Caps - 28, USTR 2.936)  (Friction Velocity knots)		Direction		(From)















T
o
t
a
l








0
-t
0z
(II
z
►
m
(II


s. Cl))	0.06	0.29	0.89	1.85	3.40	6.00	11.95	18.94	30.68	42.59	56.42	73.04	2.53	0.89	0.37 Variance (ft2)
Significant Wave Height  = 42.9 ft  (13.1 m)
*S1 (j) in ft 2-seeonds, S2((1)) in ft2-seeonds-radians-1, S3 ((1)) in mete rs 2-seeon ds-rad ian-s •


 




spreads over a widening arc.
  As previously noted, semi-empirical, computer-based 
models for predicting the growth, decay and propa- 
gation of ocean wave spectra have been developed, for 
example, by Pierson et al (1955). Wave generation, 
decay and propagation  are  analyzed in time  steps  for 
a set of grid points extending over an entire  ocean 
basin. The waves arriving at a grid point at  a  given 
time step, from all other grid points in the basin at 
preceding time steps, are estimated and combined with 
the waves currently being generated by local winds. 
These wave systems are then propagated in the ap- 
propriate directions to provide a basis for the calcu- 
lation at the next time step. Local winds forecast by 
means of available meteorological data are used to 
estimate the locally generated seas. The procedure was 
further developed at the U.S. Navy's Fleet Numerical 
Oceanographic Center (FNOC) at Monterey, Califor- 
nia, into the Spectral Ocean Wave Model (SOWM) 
(Pierson, 1982). The entire calculation is massive, re- 
quiring 1575 grid points in the Northern Hemisphere, 
with time steps every six hours.
  The SOWM has been in regular use since 1974 for 
forecasting wave conditions in the North Atlantic and 
North Pacific Oceans. A sample of the resulting di- 
rectional spectra for  a particular  grid  point  is shown 
in Table 1. Because of computer limitations, the res- 
olution in both frequency and direction is not as sharp


as the engineer would desire. Nevertheless, such spec- 
tra provide far more information about the wave con- 
ditions expected at a given location at a given  time 
than a point spectrum.
Comparisons of these forecasts with measurements
are rather limited. However, there have been sufficient 
comparisons with point spectra from wave height mea- 
surements, at least, to justify such operational use as 
ship weather-routing, a routine function at FNOC. A 
further application of these wave forecasting tech- 
niques is discussed in Section 2.10.
2.10	Ocean    Wave    Data.	As  explained  in  Section
2.6	, individual ocean wave conditions can be described 
adequately only by directional spectra. For a proper 
definition of a ship's operational environment, ship de- 
signers need many representative spectra for different 
trade routes, with probability measures of the condi- 
tions they represent. An adequate set of directional 
spectra derived from measurements in the open sea is 
not available, and will not be until greatly improved 
measurement techniques exist and are in routine use. 
Satellite-based systems, mentioned under (c)following, 
will undoubtedly be utilized in future. However, the
U.S.	Navy has essentially completed a hindcast wave 
climatology program that will go far toward satisfying 
the designer's needs for data on the oceans of the 
Northern Hemisphere. Some results from this effort  
are described under (d), to follow.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	27

Table 2-Percentage Frequency of Occurrence of Wave Heights in One Meter Steps
(Hogben  and Lumb data)
Ocean area (Numbers from Fig. 21)

North Atlantic



11.57








Table 3-Observed Percentage Frequency of Occurrence of Wave Heights and Periods (Hogben and Lumb data)
Worldwide
Wave	Wave Period Ti, sec
height, m	2.5	6.5	8.5	10.5	12.5	14.5	16.5	18.5	20.5	Over 21	Total
0-1	24.0470	4.6416	0.9954	0.3316	0.1253	0.0440	0.0245	0.0147	0.1041	0.5480	30.8762
1-2	15.5208	17.0941	6.1091	1.7475	0.5498	0.1784	0.0626	0.0175	0.0194	0.0910	41.3902
2-3	1.3763	6.0543	6.0000	2.6736	0.8712	0.2668	0.0778	0.0188	0.0054	0.0057	17.3499
3-4	0.2008	1.2153	2.1165	1.6245	0.7848	0.2611	0.0817	0.0226	0.0026	0.0030	6.3129
4-5	0.0506	0.3278	0.6969	0.6998	0.4151	0.1726	0.0687	0.0196	0.0033	0.0020	2.4564
5-6	0.0187	0.0604	0.1469	0.1614	0.1063	0.0509	0.0180	0.0033	0.0012	0.0014	0.5685
6-7	0.0158	0.0587	0.1275	0.1551	0.1039	0.0490	0.0215	0.0039	0.0010	0.0011	0.5375
7-8	0.0032	0.0240	0.0622	0.0702	0.0501	0.0249	0.0120	0.0026	0.0008	0.0012	0.2512
8-9	0.0028	0.0102	0.0266	0.0380	0.0311	0.0169	0.0084	0.0018	0.0013	0.0011	0.1382
9-10	0.0013	0.0064	0.0182	0.0308	0.0247	0.0174	0.0093	0.0041	0.0022	0.0012	0.1156
10-11	0.0003	0.0002	0.0006	0.0006	0.0003	0.0001	0.0001	0.0022
11+	0.0001	0.0001	0.0004	0.0007	0.0001	0.0014
Totals	41.2373	29.4932	16.2996	7.5335	3.0636	1.0823	0.3846	0.1090	0.1414	0.6557	100.000

Table 4-Observed Percentage Frequency of Occurrence of Wave Heights and Periods (Hogben and Lumb data) 
North Atlantic
Wave	Wave Period Ti, sec








  Meanwhile, the designer's needs can be partially sat- .India, discussed in (b). But the largest collections of 
isfied by point spectra that can be associated with wind sea data are visual observations of height and period, 
speeds or Beaufort  numbers. A small set  of such spec-   some by trained  observers  on weather ships and some 
tra is available for a specific location, Weather Station by officers of merchant ships making routine reports


28	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 5-Observed Percentage Frequency of Occurrence of Wave Heights and Periods (Hogben and Lumb data)
Northern  North Atlantic

Wave	Wave Period T1 , sec
height, m
2.5
6.5
8.5
10.5
12.5
14.5
16.5
18.5
20.5
Over 21
Total
0-1
13.7204
3.4934
0.8559
0.3301
0.1127
0.0438
0.0249
0.0172
0.0723
0.3584
19.0291
1-2
11.4889
15.5036
6.4817
1.8618
0.5807
0.1883
0.0671
0.0254
0.0203
0.0763
36.2941
2-3
1.5944
7.8562
8.0854
3.7270
1.1790
0.3713
0.1002
0.0321
0.0091
0.0082
22.9629
3-4
0.3244
2.2487
4.0393
2.9762
1.3536
0.4477
0.1307
0.0428
0.0050
0.0040
11.5724
4-5
0.1027
0.7838
1.6998 ,
1.5882
0.9084
0.3574
0.1443
0.0433
0.0072
0.0049
5.6400
5-6
0.0263
0.1456
0.3749
0.4038
0.2493
0.1200
0.0382
0.0067
0.0027
0.0027
1.3702
6-7
0.0277
0.1477
0.3614
0.4472
0.2804
0.1301
0.0504
0.0113
0.0011
0.0032
1.4605
7-8
0.0084
0.0714
0.1882
0.2199
0.1634
0.0785
0.0353
0.0069
0.0018
0.0034
0.7772
8-9
0.0037
0.0325
0.0856
0.1252
0.1119
0.0558
0.0303
0.0045
0.0027
0.0033
0.4555
9-10
0.0034
0.0204
0.0674
0.1173
0.0983
0.0550
0.0303
0.0173
0.0079
0.0047
0.4220
10-11

0.0005
0.0012
0.0023
0.0031
0.0012

0.0005


0.0088
11+

0.0005
0.0007
0.0019
0.0035
0.0002


0.0005

0.0073
Totals
27.3003
30.3043
22.2415
11.8009
5.0143
1.8493
0.6517
0.2080
0.1306
0.4691
100.000




Table 6-Annual Sea-State Occurrences in the Open Ocean, North Atlantic
Significant Wave	Significant Wave	Sustained Wind	Modal Wave Period
Sea	Height (m)	Height (ft)	Speed (Knots)*	Percentage	(Sec)
State	Probability	Most






8	9-14	11.5	29.5-45.9	37.7	56-63	59.5	1.11	14.2-18.6	16.4
>8	> 14	>14	>45.9	45.9	>63	>63	0.05	18.0-23.7	20.0
•	Ambient wind sustained at 19.5 m above surface to generate fully-developed seas. To convert to another altitude,  H2 ,
a I V2 = V1(H 2 / l 9.5)111
Fl'ii:inimum is 5 percentile and maximum is 95 percentile for periods given wave height range.
••• Based on periods associated with central frequencies included in Hindcast Climatology. 
Source: Lee and Bales (1984).


Table 7-Annual Sea State Occurrences in the Open Ocean, North Pacific
         Significant Wave	Significant Wave	Sustained Wind		Modal Wave Period 
Sea	Height (m)		Height (ft)	Speed (Knots)*	Percentage		(Sec)
State	Probability	Most






8	9-14	11.5	29.5-45.9	37.7	56-63	59.5	1.56	14.5-21.5	16.4
>8	>14	> 14	>45.9	45.9	>63	>63	0.07	16.4-22.5	20.0
•	Ambient  wind sustained at 19.5 m above surface to generate fully-developed seas. To convert to another altitude,  H2 ,
a I V 2 = V1(H2 / 19.5 )1 1
Fl' inimum is 5 percentile and maximum is 95 percentile for periods given wave height range.
*** Based on periods associated with central frequencies included in Hindcast Climatology. 
Source: Lee and Bales (1984).


 



to the Weather Service. These visuai collections have 
provided the widest coverage of the world's oceans 
presently available. Although there are inevitable 
questions as to the meaning and accuracy of these 
visual estimates, they have provided the only available 
information about the wave conditions in certain ocean 
areas.
  (a)	Visual   estimates   of wave conditions.	Visual 
estimates of height and period by trained observers 
aboard weather ships can be expected to be more con- 
sistent than those by officers reporting from so-called 
"ships of opportunity." The weather ships are  at  least 
of roughly the same size, a factor  of  importance,  as 
the visual impression of the seaway is sensitive to the 
height of the observer above the water surface. Un- 
fortunately, published  weather  ship  data  are  limited 
to the North Atlantic. There are two collections avail- 
able. In the first, Roll (1958)presents a statistical anal- 
ysis of data collected during two years at the stations 
shown in Fig. 19 (Note that the weather ships have 
since been relocated). Results  in  terms  of  frequency 
of occurrence of waves of different average period and 
height are given in Fig. 20. These can well be consid- 
ered as representative for the North  Atlantic north  of 
30 deg latitude on account of the vessels' uniform 
distribution.
  Because the data are limited to just two years  and 
the variability of weather conditions from year to year


is significant. Roll's data suffer from the inherent sta- 
tistical inaccuracies of small samples, even though the 
amount of data for those years may be large. This 
limitation is partially overcome by Walden's (1964) 
analysis of ten years of data, although it is limited to 
stations I and J. These stations both  lie  in  a  region 
that experiences very severe weather throughout the 
year (Cummins and Bales, 1980), and such  statistics 
can hardly be considered representative of even the 
North Atlantic.
  The most comprehensive collection currently avail- 
able is that of Hogben and Lumb (1967),collected 
from log entries of some 500 British ships. These 
observa- tions were taken during the period 1953 to 
1961, and were taken on routes  followed by British  
ships  in all of the oceans of the  world,  Fig.  21. 
There  are  gaps, as there are important  operational  
areas  that  rarely see ships of British flag, and some of 
the data are sparse. Nevertheless, this collection 
provides the most extensive coverage available. 
Yamanouchi and Ogawa (1970) and Research Panel 
(1980) provide additional data of the  same  nature  
obtained  by Japanese  ships in the North Pacific.
  Tables 2 to 5 summarize the data presented by Hog- 
ben and Lumb-World-Wide, North Atlantic, and 
Northern North Atlantic. These tables, taken  from 
Lofft and Price (1973),provide a valuable overview of 
over a million observations. The entries relating to the


 





two North Atlantic areas are probably as good as the 
visual estimate technique permits,  since the  coverage 
in area and in numbers of seasoQs is large. The "World- 
Wide" statistics should be used with caution, as there 
are serious geographical gaps, and biases where there 
are no gaps. As all observations  were  weighted 
equally, those regions with many observations in effect 
received much more weight than those regions  with 
few observations. While these tables are useful for 
gross estimates of conditions to be expected, a more 
refined estimate should be based upon the complete 
data (Hogben and Lumb, 1967),for the region in ques- 
tion (Research Panel 1980).
  Such tabulated data on joint probabilities of wave 
heights and periods can also be presented graphically 
(See Fig. 14 in Chapter IV of Vol. I, for example).
  The basic question remains as to the reliability of 
visual estimates and just how they relate to the pa- 
rameters derived from the directional or point spec- 
trum. For some years it was considered  that  the 
visually estimated wave height could be taken as the 
significant wave  height, HI/s'  and the  observed period 
was thought to be the zero-crossing period, T•. These 
hypotheses were tested by Hogben and Lumb (1967), 
using simultaneous data from "trained" weather ship 
observers and wave recordings. The  wave  records 
were converted into point spectra,  taking  into account 
a high-frequency attenuation by the wave recorder. 
About 400 pairs of visual and measured data were 
available. Using linear regression, the following re- 
lationships were obtained:

where Hv and Tv are visually estimated height and 
period. While these are satisfactory fits within  the 
range of the rather scattered data, they seem to be in 
error for small values of Hv and Tv. Nordenstrom 
(1969)re-analyzed the same data, assuming log-normal 
distributions for wave height and period measures. He 
derived "calibration" equations for such visual obser- 
vations:



 
These curves fit the available data about  as  well  as 
the preceding straight line fits, and at least do not lead 
to obvious error outside the range of data. They are 
recommended for use for deriving estimates of the 
spectral parameters H 113 and T. from visual estimates.
This assumes that the calibration equations for trained 
weather ship observers are the same as those for mer- 
chant ship officers, and this assumption is suspect. 
However, there exists no other large body of data of 
measurements and observations that could provide 
better calibration.
  Tables 6 and 7 (Lee and Bales, 1984)summarize 
U.S. Navy data on probabilities of different wind and 
wave conditions in two areas of open ocean, based on 
the so-called "hindcast climatology" discussed in item 
(d) to follow. The table for the North Atlantic is also a 
NATO standard.
  Although many tabulations of wave data make  use 
of significant wave height, it will be noted that these 
tables utilize a scale of "Sea State Numbers." The 
significant height ranges are those adopted by the 
World Meteorological Organization and are becoming 
more generally used by ship operators. However, other 
scales are also in use, including some based on the 
Beaufort scale, which was originally a wind-speed 
scale. Care must be exercised to ascertain what  scale  
is intended when sea state numbers are given.
  (b)	Point  spectrafrom	wave measurements. Point 
spectra have been computed from wave records since 
shortly after the wave spectral model was  invented. 
Any accurate wave trace of sufficient duration is us- 
able for this purpose, and the Tucker meter, a ship- 
borne wave meter, has made it possible to obtain 
records in the open ocean (Tucker, 1956).While in 
such an instrument there is a frequency  attenuation  
effect for the shorter wavelengths, the spectrum can be 
par- tially corrected for the error introduced. Certain of 
the British weather ships have been fitted with Tucker 
meters, and wave height records have  been  collected 
on a routine basis while on  station,  although  these 
strip chart records have not been routinely used to


 	 



calculate the point spectra. Floating buoys with ver- 
tical accelerometers have also been used for source 
data.
  The shipborne records attracted the attention of 
oceanographers Pierson and Moskowitz, who were in- 
terested in the wave generation process and fully-de- 
veloped spectra in particular. 460 wave'records were 
selected that appeared to represent the proper met- 
erological conditions, but it was discovered after spec- 
tra had been computed that even in this deliberately 
biased set only about one in seven could be considered 
to represent an "uncontaminated" fully-developed sea- 
way (Moskowitz, et aI, 1962, 1963). While these spectra 
provide valuable information, the biases toward fully- 
developed seas in the selection process make the set 
unsuitable for general use. Wave conditions are more 
typically either rising or decaying, and are usually 
contaminated with swell from other storms.
  The problem of obtaining a more representative set 
was addressed by Hoffman and Miles (1976) using the 
statistical technique of stratified sampling. Hoffman


reviewed a listing of the wave records obtained on 
three weather ships at Station India (lon Fig.  19) 
during the period 1954-1967. A total of 1085  records 
was available, roughly equally spread over the year. 
These were sorted into groups by wind speed and sea- 
son (Table 8). A set of 334 records was  then  selected 
by a reasonably random process, so as to have ap- 
proximately equal numbers in the various wind speed- 
season groups, except in the higher sea  states  (Table 
9).
  This collection of point spectra provides a very use- 
ful display of typical conditions to be expected in the 
severe weather region of Station India. The set is free 
from a bias toward fully-developed seas, and multi- 
modal (double-peaked) spectra are frequent. While Ta- 
bles 8 and 9 show the set to be biased toward more 
severe seas, there are sufficient data to restore the 
balance. Indeed, if it be assumed that the types of seas 
associated with a wind of given intensity are indepen- 
dent of location, the data can be used to predict ship 
behavior in any region for which there is knowledge



 


 



of wind climatology. While this assumption cannot be 
taken as strictly true (swell patterns, storm durations, 
and fetch can be expected to have geographical vari- 
ation independently of wind speed),  it is still possible 
to generate an approximate wave climatology.
  The variability of spectra having approximately the 
same area and hence the same average or significant 
wave height is interesting and important for ship de- 
sign. Figs. 23 (a) and (b) show sets of such  spectra 
from Hoffman and Miles (1976) for two ranges of 
Hils.1f a particular  ship response  is  sharply  tuned  to 
a natural frequency (as is the usual case with roll, 
Section 3) it would behave in quite different ways in 
the various seas shown in anyone set.  This suggests 
that height and period should be considered as sepa- 
rate variables in  predicting  seakeeping  performance 
in a given environmental area.
  (c)	Directional spectra. As previously noted there 
does not exist a collection of directional spectra derived 
from wave pattern measurements comparable to the  
sets of point spectra described in the previous section.. 
While such spectra are needed for both oceanographic


and engineering purposes, the vast amount of simul- 
taneous wave pattern data required and the complexity 
of the analysis have made such a project prohibitively 
expensive for other than a few samples. In effect, an 
instantaneous contour map of  the  surface  is needed, 
or, if directional ambiguities are to be eliminated, con- 
tour maps that are slightly displaced in time are re- 
quired. An example of such a map is shown in Fig. 22. 
While such an analysis has been tried, using  stereo 
pairs of photographs from an airplane (Chase, et al 
1960)the sets of spectra are so limited as to be of little 
use for engineering purposes.
  An alternative approach has been to fit a buoy with 
an inertial measurement system. The quantities re- 
corded are wave slope in two perpendicular known 
compass directions, and surface displacement (by dou- 
ble integration of the measured vertical acceleration). 
From records of these quantities against time, it is 
possible to estimate the distribution of variance with 
respect to direction in any frequency band (Longuet- 
Higgins, Cartwright and Smith, 1963). If assumptions 
are made as to the nature of the spreading function,


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	33





































J
0.2.































0.4



















































































I
0,6
	0
.8
	L
O	1.2
CillCULA
K 
PIIQUDIC
Y, 111, 
IAD,/SEC
.






































1.4
	1.
6


Fig. 23b Typical families of wave spectra significant wave height range of 10.7-
13.7 m (35-45 ft) (Hoffman and Miles, 1976)



it is possible to generate a simplified directional spec­ 
trum estimate from these data. This technique has 
been used primarily for special situations such as full­ 
scale trials, and no large collections are available for 
more general application.
However, new techniques are being developed for


obtaining directional spectra in the open ocean. For 
example, there are airborne instrument systems that 
are operable, and one of which is used from a 
satellite spacecraft (Jackson, et al, 1985). Also, 
estimated di­ rectional spectra, based on available 
wind data, have been obtained systematically in 
connection with the



Table 10-Relative Frequency of Occurrence of Significant Wave Heights within 
Sub-Regions of the North Atlantic, from Stratified Sample of Hindcasts in U.S. 
Navy  Wave Climatology
Stratum	1	2	3	4	5	6


Region\
A 
B 
C 
D 
E
Total A-E 
North Sea
G. of Mexico


S
a
m
p
l
e


 


prehensive wind data that have been reported and col- 
lected for years over the world's  important  trade 
routes. Accordingly, the U.S. Navy undertook to make 
use of the forecasting tool SOWM(described in Section 
2.9), in conjunction with observed rather than forecast 
wind data, to hindcast conditions for the entire North- 
ern Hemisphere over a twenty-year period.
  Since these spectra are based upon previously re- 
corded, rather than forecast, meteorological data, they 
presumably should be somewhat more accurate  than 
the routine forecasts. It should be noted, however, that 
the primary need of the ship designer is unbiased sta- 
tistical sets of spectra, typical of region and season. 
Precise accuracy of the spectra  for  a given location 
and time is not essential so long as the discrepancies 
between the hindcast and actual spectra are relatively 
unbiased. An added feature of this approach is that it 
provides estimated directional as well as point spectra. 
From the large quantity of calculated directional wave  
spectra  stored  on  magnetic  tape  in  the format
of Table 1, a wave climatology has been generated, 
organized for the ship designer (Cummins and Bales, 
1980;Bales, et aI, 1982;Bales, 1984). Stratified samples 
of hindcast spectra were prepared for both the North 
Atlantic and the North Pacific. Each of these sets in- 
cludes approximately 2000 spectra, divided into six 
strata (by significant wave height), randomly distrib- 
uted by season and location. Fig. 24 shows the North 
Atlantic divided into 5 sub-regions, A to E. Fig. 25 
shows the relative weights (Le., frequencies of occur-


 




rence) of the six strata for the five regions, while 
numerical values are given in Table 10.
  It should not be expected that statistics derived from 
hindcasts will be identical (or even very similar) to 
those from other sources. The hindcasts are free from 
geographical and observer biases, although wind data 
are more plentiful in some areas than in others.  But 
they substitute the inaccuracies of the pressure field- 
wind-wave propagation model, with its computational 
limitations. Comparisons with recorded data  are  at 
least as good for hindcasts as for visual"estimates. The 
two elements of the hindcasts that are absent from all 
other data sets are information on the directional as- 
pects, which, though approximate, can be critical for 
ship design, and a valid measure of probability of oc- 
currence associated with each hindcast.
  The wave climatology also includes a wealth of sta- 
tistical data on parameters describing the  collected 
wave spectra, as for example, the significant wave 
heights and modal periods, that can be used to gen- 
erate Bretschneider point spectra, as discussed in Sec- 
tion 2.11(b). Other data include primary wave direction, 
wave persistence (duration), and corresponding wind 
speed and direction (U.S. Navy 1983, 1985), (Bales, et 
a11981) and (Lee, et al 1985).
  Cummins and Bales (1980) review  a ten-year  span 
of results in the North Atlantic. Conclusions of general 
interest follow. There is a band across the North At- 
lantic from Ireland to Newfoundland that experiences 
severe sea conditions (over 3 m average significant 
wave height) for over six months of the year. Several 
times a year storms may be expected in  this  region 
with significant wave heights exceeding 10 m. Modal 
wave periods exceed values that would be estimated 
from observed data such as found in Hogben and Lumb 
(1967), particularly for the more severe seas. Fig. 26 
compares the most probable modal period for a given 
significant wave height, as obtained from Hogben and


 




 


Lumb, with the hindcast data. The frequency of oc- 
currence of high waves also exceeds  Hogben  and 
Lumb estimates, as shown in Fig. 27. (The location of 
grid point 127 is shown in Fig. 28). These differences 
are significant and should eventually be resolved as 
more observed and measured data become available. 
Meanwhile, for design purposes the hindcast clima- 
tology seems to differ on the safe side.
  Cummins, Bales and Gentile (1981) examined hind- 
casts over a ten-year period at three locations in the 
severe North Atlantic weather  zone, one on each side 
of the basin and one in the center, Fig. 28. While there 
are differences that can be associated with geograph- 
ical location (relation of prevailing wind to  land 
masses, for example) the similarities are even more 
striking. Fig. 29 shows the almost identical cumulative 
distributions of significant wave height. Therefore, a 
climatology based on anyone of these locations would 
not be greatly in error for the entire zone, except for 
slight displacement of the seasons.
  The directional parameters ·of the climatology and 
their inter-relations were examined, although assump- 
tions made in the mathematical forecasting model per- 
mit only general conclusions to be drawn until better 
data on directionality become available. A typical pat- 
tern begins to emerge, that is, severe sea states (above 
5 m or 16 ft significant wave height) tend to be quite 
uniform in their spectral structure, while moderate 
seas (less than 2 m or 6 ft) vary greatly. The spectra 
of severe seas are usually unimodal, nearly symmetric 
about the dominant direction, and have a spreading 
function near cos2 over ± 90 deg from the dominant 
direction. Moderate sea states vary from near unidi- 
rectional to a locally generated wind sea superimposed 
on one or more identifiable swells from random direc- 
tions. Thus, the spectral structure is likely to be far 
more complex than that of the severe storm seas. See 
Fig. 29.
Bales, Cummins and Comstock (1982) are primarily


concerned with estimates of the performance of var- 
ious ships in sets of the hindcast sea states. However, 
this reference includes a comparison between the 
Sta- tion India wave data and hindcasts for  the same 
dates at a nearby grid point. A similar comparison is 
avail- able in Chen, Chen and Hoffman (1979). Both 
of these evaluations conclude that point spectra 
derived  from the hindcasts are reasonably consistent 
with weather ship measurements.
   2.11 Idealized Spectral Families. The  variation  in 
form of both directional and point spectra  is  great, 
even for spectra with nearly identical significant wave 
heights. Designing for this multiplicity of environ- 
mental conditions introduces some difficult logical 
questions. While these questions can be treated, an 
attractive alternative is provided by certain idealized 
families of spectra that have been devised for special 
purposes. The spectra in these families  are  identified 
by a small number of parameters, permitting an anal- 
ysis of the variations of some ship operational quality 
with respect to variation of a particular sea parameter. 
Where a probability of occurrence can be assigned to 
members of the family, these families are particularly 
useful for design. But even when such probability 
mea- sures are not available, a design based upon 
acceptable performance over the entire set should be 
a successful design. The following discussion of 
particular families of point spectra will review 
limitations that can affect their use in design of ships 
and floating structures.
  (a)	The Pierson-Moskowitz   Spectrum.	This 
spec- tral form, which depends upon a single 
parameter, was developed primarily for oceanographic 
use, and in fact is a basic element in the  forecasting  
of  storm  waves. It is intended to represent the point 
spectrum of a fully-developed sea, that is, fetch and 
duration  are great, and there is no contaminating 
swell from other generating areas. As previously 
mentioned, from 460 available point spectra 
Moskowitz, et al (1962, 1963) chose 54 spectra that 
met the appropriate weather criteria. The winds for the  
chosen  spectra  had  to  be of reasonable duration, to 
be less at the beginning and end of the wave record 
than the mean, and to be within
±45 deg of the mean wind direction throughout the 
record. Since forward speed affects the  records  the 
ship making the wave measurements by means of a 
Tucker wave recorder  had to have  a speed  less  than  
2 knots. Spectra containing noticeable swell were 
elim- inated by inspection.
  These selected spectra were  grouped  into a  family 
of five wind speeds: 20, 25, 30, 35, and 40 knots. 
Using this spectral family, along with  the  similarity  
theory of S. A. Kitaigorodskii, Pierson and 
Moskowitz (1964)
!I.rrivedat the following analytical formulation for 
ideal sea spectra representing fully-developed seas,

 


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	37



S(w) = spectral ordinate in cm2-sec
w = frequency in radians/sec
a = 8.10 X 10-s
/3 = 0.74
g = acceleration of gravity in cm/sec2
Vw = wind speed in cm/sec (19.5 m above the 
surface)
It is clear that the only parameter is the wind speed. 
This spectral family is inappropriate for general de­ 
sign use. While its oceanographic importance is great, 
it should be recognized as an asymptotic form, reached 
after an extended period of steady wind, with no con­



approximate, at best, it has proven to be of great value for 
engineering purposes. A Pierson-Moskowitz spec­ trum 
family is obtained when
A=	ag2
Bl w4   = /3(g/V,,,)4
  Useful forms of the Bretschneider spectrum can be 
obtained by normalizing frequency with respect to the 
modal value, wm. Then,
Wm  SE(w/wm> =  5 (wm/ w)5e xp [-  1.25(wm/ w)4	(80)


tamination from an underlying swell. While it might 
seem an appropriate model for extreme storm condi­ 
tions, fully-developed seas for very high winds are 
known to be rare, as the duration and fetch are seldom 
sufficient for spectral stability to be reached.


The two parameters are seen to be Wm and E. See Fig.
31, which is identical for all the members of the family. It  
is often  more convenient to substitute  H 113    for  E.
With a narrow-band spectrum,7 H 113 = 4/E. Then


(b)	The Bretschneider Spectrum. This spectrum is


WmS(w/ Wm=)	O 312(   /	)  6


a two-parameter family that permits period and wave 
height to be assigned separately (Bretschneider, 1952, 
1957). It has the form,


2	•	Wm W exp
l/3
[-1.25(wm/ w)4 ]	(81)
The parameters wm and H1;3  can be directly related to


S(w) =


A
exp [-   Bl w4 ]
	
(77)
Ct)


the extensive data 
available on observed 
wave heights and 
periods, as discussed 
later.


where the two parameters A and B depend upon the 
modal frequency, wm, and the variance, E. The modal 
(peak) frequency is
4	]l/4


The moments of the Bretschneider family are
m_l  =  0.8572 El Wm	(82a)
  (82b)


w	= [ -B


(78)


m2 =  1.982 E 
wm2	(82c)



and


m	5
E 
= 
Al4
B	(79)


The 
fourt
h 
mom
ent 
diver
ges, 
whic
h 
impli
es 
that 
the 
mean 
crest
-to-
crest 
frequ
ency 
and 
the 
mean
-
squar
e 
slope 
are 
infini
te. 
This 
is a 
com
plica
tion 
in 
treati
ng


  A family of these spectra for fixed significant wave 
height of 5 m is shown in Fig. 30. This family was 
designed to represent rising and  falling seas  as  well  
as fully-developed seas. While it must be considered
1.e.----,-------,---.----.----.-----.-----.


certain problems analytically. However, the integrand is 
asymptotic to Constant/w for large w; so the integral for 
m4  diverges very slowly. In problems involving m,, the 
spectrum should be truncated at some reasonable value 
(St. Denis, 1980). If w does not exceed 5wm, 
corresponding to a wavelength 1/26th of the modal wave­ 
length, m, = 7.049 Ewm4.
  From the moments, the various period parameters 
can be calculated:
T_l = 0.857 Tm = 5.385/wm	(83a)
Tr = 0.773 Tm	(83b)
T,  = 0.710 Tm	(83c)
  The 15th International Towing Tank Conference 
(ITTC, 1978) recommended the use of a form of the 
Bretschneider spectrum (for average conditions, not fully 
developed seas) when more specifically appro­ priate 
spectral forms are not known. This is Equation (77), with


0  '----  0_4-  --='"o.a=-----'---'-1.2		1,,.,_e  
SCALE FOR w,.-t.>..,
Fig. 31 Normalized Bretschneider spectrum


2._._,o ,2.4
 




    7 But with a Bretschneider speco/m. where E = 1, St. 
Denis (1980) points out that H 118 = 3,/E = ½ AIB.


 

schneider spectral family, with probability measures 
for each member.
  The basic assumption in such a procedure  is  that 
any seaway can be adequately represented by a Bret- 
schneider spectral form, or at least that errors in form 
introduce no bias in the corresponding measures  of 
ship performance when using sets of Bretschneider 
spectra. But the errors in form in particular cases may 
be considerable. Point spectra from wave records (such 
as Figs. 9 and 23) show that multi-modal spectra are 
common, and no single-modal Bretschneider form can 
match the shape of such a spectrum very well. A more 
subtle error may be present in the  fit of the  spectrum 
of a swell from a distant storm that is sufficiently 
dominant to hide the effects of any local disturbance. 
This is also a fairly common condition. In such a case, 
the effect of distance from the wave source is to limit 
the band width of the waves reaching the observation 
point. In effect, the high-frequency tail is reduced or 
eliminated. The Bretschneider form will be a poor fit, 
as it has a well-defined tail, proportioned to the modal 
value of the spectrum. This could lead to  a prediction 
of a high-frequency response much greater than that 
which would actually occur (St. Denis, 1980a).
  Accepting the fact that some of the spectra corre- 
sponding to a particular pair Hvo Tv may deviate from 
the corresponding Bretschneider form, the latter may 
still provide a good measure  of  ship performance  if 
the deviations collectively do not introduce a large bias. 
Comparisons have been made between calculated ship 
performance in observed spectra and "matching" Bret- 
schneider spectra (Ochi and Bales, 1977). While there 
were the expected differences in performance for spe- 
cific pairs, these differences tended to disappear 
through statistical averaging when sets of pairs were 
compared. This study is reassuring for those who have 
made use of this very powerful tool. However, in any 
particular problem the possibility of bias should always 
be considered. An example where bias might be pres- 
ent is a search for extreme conditions, Le., those that 
would induce extreme ship rolling or hull bending mo- 
ment. It is probable that such conditions are  more 
likely to occur in a narrow-band swell rather than  in 
the wider band of a Bretschneider spectrum. In this 
case, average response is not desired. Rather, a mea- 
sure is needed of seas within a period-height cell that 
induces large responses.

  (c) The  JONSW AP  Spectrum.	The ideal spectral 
forms described in the preceding sub-sections are in- 
tended to represent open-ocean wave conditions. How- 
ever,	there	are	many	regions		of	engineering 
importance where there are geographical boundaries 
that limit the fetch in the generating area. The North 
Sea is such a region. Extensive oceanographic mea- 
surements have been made there under the Joint North 
Sea Wave Project (JONSWAP) (Hasselman, 1973, and 
Ewing, 1975). Wave measurements were made at a


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	39





1.
12
1.0


fO.
"







iii







iii
t:•
!!




All
.,
tD



•
•
Ill
•


"·

0.2	o.,	U	0.1	1.0	1.2	U	1.6	I.I	2.0
FIEllllll'IIIIIPS
Fig. 33 Comparison of measured and six-parameter spectrum, significant 
wave height 2.38 m (7.8 ft), from Ochi and Hubble (1976)


I•	1111
•	•o
0.2	o.,	G.6	0.1	1.0	1.2	U	U	I.I	1.0
Fll[IMIICY  II  lll'S
Fig. 34 Comparison of measured and six-parameter spectrum, significant 
wave height 14.5 m (47.7 ft), from Ochi and Hubble (1976)




lO	i	lOO
2.5
V       25	V	250
Iii








\ ")!:'-!ilf;(.MT '4£:r.til 1.j "· ZCJ.S rt.)
t           j	.	I
--+--+--t--- ------+-----
; 2S


-"-i'.


2.0


 	! 20



; 20
iii



200


-t--l-..·--+--,


iI	I.I	!
 


.---Ii _;i_ 	'' '
! '


iii
JS
l!


!I:!
ll 10


1.0


!I:!
•	1


- 
·-
--
--
t--
--
+-
,
 
	
I
O


"i,


 		0.5	50   _....;,.....µ.JIU-l-+=----1!1-,\,,+_.. ,--i--+--- -
•	I       ,
'	'


 	, ,


0.2	o.,	U	0.1	1.0	1.2	U	1.6	I.I	U
FIIE'Ulltl'  11 R'S

Fig. 35 Family of six parameter wave spectra far significant wave height
3.0 m (9.8 ft), from Ochi and Hubble (1976)


U	I.<	I.	I.
FIIE'llli:IICY   IN lll'S

Fig. 36 Family of six-parameter wave spectra for significant wave height
9.0 m (29.5 ft), from Ochi and Hubble (1976)




Table 11-0chi Six-Parameter Wave Spectrum Family-Values of Six Parameters as a Function of Significant Wave




Most Probable


Hs1
	
H,a


Height (H,5


m)
(l)ml	"'m2




A1	A2



 


40	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



series of positions at various distances from the island 
of Sylt in the German Bight when the wind was off­ 
shore. The distances of the observation positions from 
the coast ranged up to 160 km (100 mi).
  As a family, the spectra computed from these rec­ 
ords had much narrower peaks than the Pierson-Mos­ 
kowitz family. An extensive analysis found that the 
spectra could be fitted by the form;
4


eter spectral form with great latitude to match the 
shapes of observed spectra:




(89)


8((1)) = ag(l)- 5 exp [-¾ :
where
'Y is 3.3




'Yexp[-(o,-o,,,.) /2u .,,,.-J



(87)



where j = 1, 2 stands for 
the lower and higher-fre­ 
quency components, 
respectively. The six 
parameters, Hs1, H1r2, 
"'mi, "'m2, A1 and A2 
may be determined nu­ 
merically to minimize 
the difference from a 
specific


u is 0.07 for "'< "'"'
is 0.09 for  "'> "'"'
a is 0.076	-0 22
"'"' is 2?T J,,.g/V wio (modal frequency)
_xis g xlVwi/
fm  is 3.5 x-O.S3
xis fetch
Vwio is wind speed at 10m (32 ft) above sea level
  Note that the JONSWAP spectrum is simply a form 
of Bretschneider spectrum, Equation (87), multiplied 
by a frequency dependent factor;
2	2 2
'Yexp [-(.,-.,ml l2u"'m]

The JONSWAP spectra for a constant wind speed are 
shown in Fig. 32 for various fetches. However, recent 
research has shown that this parameter, 'Y, is affected 
by sampling variability and that reduced values may 
be more appropriate (Donelan and Pierson, 1983).
  (d) The Ochi 6-parameter spectrum. As noted pre­ 
viously, the variability in form of point spectra is very 
great, and many of them do not resemble the Bret­ 
schneider form. Ochi and Hubble (1976) have developed 
a theoretical family which can provide a much better 
fit to most spectra derived from wave measurements 
(see also Ochi, 1978). They start with a basic form,


observed spectrum. Figs. 33 and 34 suggest the 
range of shapes within the family in fitting to quite 
different spectral types. In the case of double peaks 
(Fig. 33), suggesting the superposition of waves 
from two dif­ ferent storms, no indication of their 
relative directions is given.
  Ochi explored the statistics  of  the  six  parameters 
by fitting some 800 point-spectra from British wea he; 
ship wave records. From these, he developed statisti­ 
cally a specific set of 11 spectra for a given significant 
wave height for use in ship design. One spectrum, 
essentially that corresponding to the modal values of 
the various parameters, he calls the most probable 
spectrum. The other spectra are defined in terms of
0.95 confidence bands of the various parameters. 
These ten sets of parameters are specified as functions 
of the significant  wave  height,  H118  or  H,; see Table 
11. Ochi recommends a weight of 0.5 for the most 
probable spectrum and 0.05 for each of the other 
spectra. The families for H. equal to 3 m and 9 m, all 
unim dal, are shown in Fig. 35.
  The sets of observational spectra that were used to 
explore the statistics of the six parameters  include 
some inherent bias. The set used by Pierson and Mos­ 
kowitz for the development of the full-developed sea 
spectrum was biased toward pure, uncontaminated_lo­ 
cal sea conditions; the stratified sample from Station
India  was  biased  toward  severe  sea  conditions; and


( 4A + 1


)4 A
H2


both of 
these 
sets were 
used by 
Ochi. All 
of these


8("') = ¼


4	"'"'


• (1)4•).+l


spectra 
were 
from 
British 
weather 
ships in 
the North


r(X)	 	
(4X + 1)(   /	)  4 ]
exp [	4	"'"' "'



(88)


Atlantic; so there is a geographical bias as 
well. The lack of directional information is 
a further limitation. The Ochi six-
parameter family should not be taken to be 
a valid statistical representation of all seas. 
But


using a new shape parameter, X. r(X) is a gamma 
function, and the parameter H, is the significant wave 
height, H118. This modification of the Bretschneider
form reduces  to the latter when  X = 1. It  is unimodal,
with the peak becoming sharper with increasing A. By 
adding two of these forms, Ochi obtained  a six-param-


with this reservation, it can be very useful in 
exploring the range of response of any engineering 
structure as a function of spectral form. While the 
complexity of the form and the large number of 
members limit its attractiveness for desk calculator 
use, this is no hand­ icap when a computer is 
available.








  3.1  Introdudion.	The response of a ship advancing 
in a seaway is a complicated phenomenon  involving 
the interactions between the vessel dynamics and sev- 
eral distinct hydrodynamic forces. It would be impos- 
sible to cover comprehensively the entire subject  of 
ship motions in one short chapter. Therefore, we will 
concentrate on those aspects of ship motion theory and 
experiment that have proven useful to the designer. 
Specifically, a linear theory of ship motions will be 
presented. All ship responses are nonlinear to some 
extent, but in many cases when nonlinearities are small 
a linear theory will yield good predictions.
  The assumption of linearity for the ship response 
allows us to use many powerful analysis techniques 
developed in other fields. As discussed in the previous 
section, the seaway can be considered a random proc- 
ess and spectral techniques can be used to define the 
characteristics of the seaway. The response of the ship 
to a seaway is also a random  process,  and  therefore 
the same spectral techniques can be used  to  analyze 
the ship responses. In Section 4 of this chapter the 
applicable theory of random processes and linear sys- 
tem theory will be explained. For the present  we need 
to note only that by knowing the  responses  of a ship  
to regular waves of different frequencies, we can pre- 
dict the statistics of the responses to actual random 
seaways. Accordingly, in this  section the responses  of 
a vessel to regular waves will be discussed.
  A ship advancing at a steady mean forward speed 
with arbitrary heading in a train of regular waves will 
move in six degrees of freedom. That is, the ship's 
motion can be considered to be made up of three trans- 
lational components, surge, sway and heave, and three 
rotational components, roll, pitch and yaw (Fig. 37). 
Consequently, for an arbitrarily shaped vessel, six non- 
linear equations of motion, with six  unknowns,  must 
be set up and solved simultaneously. However, for 
slender vessels in low to moderate sea states it is 
possible to assume that the ship motions will be small 
and hence to develop a linearized theory. For the usual 
case of an unrestrained ship with port! starboard sym- 
metry, the six non-linear equations reduce  to two sets 
of three linear equations. The vertical-plane or longi- 
tudinal motions (surge, heave and pitch) are uncoupled 
from the horizontal-plane or transverse motions (sway, 
roll and yaw).
  In this section, a strip theory will be developed for 
the motion of a ship in regular waves at forward speed 
and arbitrary heading. Strip theory is the method most 
widely used to predict ship motions; it gives reasonably 
accurate results over a wide range of parameters. Sub- 
sequent to the discussion of strip theory, a brief review 
of other ship motion theories under development will  
be presented. The final subsections will be devoted to


42	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



translational modes the forces acting on a body must 
equal the mass times the acceleration. For the rota­ 
tional modes the moments acting on the body equal 
the mass moment of inertia times the angular accel­ 
eration. Thus, for heave, 'Yls, with the origin at the 
center of gravity (which must be located at the WL 
for this simple case),
fl. iis = Fs	(91)
and for pitch, 715 ,
/55    iis = Fs	(92)
where  fl. is  the  mass  (displacement), fs5   is the  mass 
moment of inertia about the y-axis and F 3 and F 5 rep­ 
resent the total force and moment, respectively, acting 
on the body, as functions of time. For the simplified 
case, the total force and moment consist mainly of 
fluid forces, both hydrostatic and hydrodynamic. (The 
heave gravitational force is balanced by the static 
buoyancy force in calm water and this defines the T7s
= 0 position). In a linear theory, the fluid forces (and
moments) can be conveniently divided between the 
forces due to the waves acting on a restrained ship, 
i.e., the forces that excite the motions, and the radia­ 
tion forces due to the motions of the ship in an as­ 
sumed calm sea. That is,


A;k, B;k, Cik is adopted in anticipation of its 
necessary use for the complete 6-degree of 
freedom case to be discussed subsequently. Where 
the subscripts are the same (A33 , B33) a simple, 
uncoupled coefficient in the heave (3) or pitch (5) 
mode is intended. Where the subscripts are 
different (Ass, B 35) the meaning is that the k-mode 
is coupled into the j-mode (e.g., A 35 ij 5 rep­ resents 
the force in the heave mode due to a pitch 
acceleration).
  The final coupled equations of motion for heave 
and pitch of a vessel in regular head seas are 
obtained by combining Equations (91), (92), (93) 
and (94). The ra­ diation forces are moved to the 
left-hand side of the equations because they are 
proportional to the un­ known motions. Thus,
(fl.+ Asah}s + Bsa'iJs + Css'Yls + Assiis
+ Bss 'iJ5  + CssT/s =  jFExsl COS (wet+ Es)   ( 95)
(/ 55 + A55) iis + B55 iJs + C55T/s + A53 
iis
+ B531]3 + C537'/3 = IFExal COS (wet+ EJ
The Aik-terms correspond to added mass, in phase 
with vertical accelerations, the B;k-terms to 
hydrodynamic damping, in phase with vertical 
velocity. Terms in­
volving the coefficient C;k are called restoring 
forces


Fs(t) = FExa<t) +F n (t)
Fs(t) = FExs<t) + Fns<O


(92)


and moments, representing the net 
hydrostatic buoy­ ancy effects of 
the ship motions. It should be 
noted that the C;k are related to the 
hydrostatic coefficients


  The excitations for sinusoidal waves are expressed 
as,


used in ship stability calculations, i.e., C33, C35 , and 
C55 are related to tons per cm immersion, change 
in displacement per cm of trim and moment to 
trim one


FE4t) = IFEx 1 cos (w,t + Es)
FEx (t ) = IFExsl COS (w,t + E5)


(93)


cm, respectively.
  Equations (95) are similar to the 
coupled equations that would be found 
for a two-degree-of-freedom


where IFE x 1 refers to the amplitude of the heave force 
and jFExsl to the amplitude of the pitch moment, and


spring-mass-damper system. There are mass, 
damping and spring terms on the left-hand side, and 
on the


where E3 and E5 are the phase angles between the ex­


right-hand side the excitation. However, the 
equations
are much different from the usual spring-mass-
damper


citation and the waves.
  In linear theory, the hydrodynamic radiation forces 
due to the coupled motions of the vessel in otherwise 
calm water can be expressed in terms that are directly 
proportional to the vertical displacements, velocities 
and accelerations. For sinusoidal motions, the hy­ 
drodynamic radiation force and moment can be written 
as,


system in that the coefficients and the excitation 
are all functions of frequency. For a given 
frequency they are all constant and the system has 
a solution. For another frequency the values of the 
coefficients and the exciting forces will all be 
different. Hence, it has been shown (Ogilvie, 1964) 
that the correct solution of these equations of 
motion in the time domain requires the addition of 
complicated convolution integrals. To


Fn3 
Fn5


= - 
[Ass(w)iJs 
+ 
Bss(w)'iJs 
+ Css'Yls
+ 
A35(w) 
iJs + 
Bss(w) 
Tls + 
Css iJs]	(94)
= - 
(A53(w}ij3 
+ 
B53(w)'iJs 
+ C53713
+ 
Ass(w)iJ
s + 
Bss(w)iJ
s + 
C55T/s]


overc
ome 
this 
diffic
ulty it 
is 
neces
sary 
only 
to 
consi
der 
the 
equati
ons in 
the 
frequ
ency 
doma
in, as 
show
n 
sub­ 
seque
ntly. 
A 
comp
lete 
discu
ssion 
of 
these 
point
s can 
be 
found 
in 
Cum
mins 
(1962
), 
Ogilv
ie 
(1964
) and 
We­ 
hause
n 
(1971
).
  The 
cross-
coupling 
between 
heave 
and 
pitch 
results 
from the 
coefficie
nts with 
subscript
s 35 or 
53. For a


where Aik(w) and Bik(w) are coefficients that are func­ 
tions of frequency. The minus sign is introduced for 
convenience in the final equations of motion.
The double-subscript notation for the coefficients


fore-and-aft symmetric ship at zero forward speed 
the cross-coupling is zero. Even though typical 
ships are almost fore-and-aft symmetric, the cross-
coupling be­ tween heave and pitch is very 
important and must be


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	43



retained in order to correctly predict the motions in 
head seas at forward speed.
  The terms on the right-hand side of the equations 
represent the excitations, the forces or moments that 
would act on a restrained ship encountering waves at
a forward speed U • I FE x I and I FE x I are the ampli­


"if31  1s the imaginary  part of 7f3
l7fal is the magnitude of heave res onse ampli­ tude and 
equals , "ifaR2 + "ifa/
u is the phase angle of heave response or
tan- 1(1fa/ "ifaR)


0	3	5


tudes of these harmonic forces and E3 and Es the phase 
angles. In order to apply hydrodynamic theory to ob­ 
tain expressions for the excitation amplitudes, the ex­ 
citing forces and moments are usually subdivided into 
the Froude-Krylov and diffraction excitations. The 
Froude-Krylov excitations represent the integration of
the  pressure  over the  body surface that would exist
  

In general it is understood that throughout this 
chapter, unless otherwise noted, the real part is to be 
taken in all expressions involving e;,,,•1
  Similarly the exciting force and moment can be ex­ 
pressed as


in the incident wave system if the body were not pres­ 
ent. The diffraction exciting forces and moments are 
caused by the diffraction or modification of the incident


FExa<t) = iFExal cos (w.t + Ea) = FEx e;,,,•t FExs(t) = 
IFExsl cos (w.t  + Es)   = FExs ;e "'•1


(98)


waves due to the presence of the vessel. The Froude­ 
Krylov forces and moments are sometimes used to 
approximate the total exciting forces. This is a good 
approximation if the wavelength is much longer than 
the vessel length. For shorter wavelengths the ap­ 
proximation is increasingly inaccurate because the dif­ 
fraction force becomes significant.  For  short  waves 
the diffraction force may become approximately one­


where FExs and FExs are now taken to be the complex 
exciting force and moment amplitudes, containing both 
amplitude and phase. Making these substitutions in 
Equation  (95),  the  e;,,,•1   cancel  out,  and  the  resulting 
equations are:


half of the total exciting force.
  Thus, we have the two Equations (95) in two un­ 
knowns, TJ 3 and 'Tis, which can be readily solved in this 
simple case of pitch and heave in head seas. To do this


+ (-w.2Aas + iw.Bas + Cas)7fs = F Ex3 (- w.2(1 55 + 
Ass) + iw.Bss + Css)7fs


(heave)

(pitch)


(99)

(100)


it is convenient to transform Equation (95) into com­ 
plex number format, while  at  the  same time taking 
the time derivatives to obtain velocity and acceleration. 
In linear theory, the harmonic responses of the ves­ sel, 
TJJt), will be proportional to the amplitude of the 
exciting forces and at the same frequency, but with 
phase shift. Consequently, the ship motions will have
the form:
TJi(t) = 11hl cos (w.t + o";) = "ifie;,,,•t


+ (-w.2Asa+ iw.Bsa + Csa)7fa = FEx5
J=  3, 5	k  = 3, 5
where
Aik is the added mass coefficient in ;"th direction 
due to k th motion.
Bik is the damping coefficient in jth direction due 
to k th motion.
Cik is hydrostatic restoring force coefficient in j th





where


11i(t) 
=  
iw.1jje;"
'•t	j  =   3, 5
ijJt) 
= - 
w.21jj
e;,,,•1

7f,- is 
the 
complex 
respons
e 
amplitu
de, and


(96)


d
i
r
e
c
t
i
o
n
 
d
u
e
 
t
o
 
k
 
t
h
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
.
F
E
x
-
a
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
x
  
e
x
c
i
t
i
n
g
  
f
o
r
c
e
  
a
n
d
  
m
o
m
e
n
t
 
'
	
a
m
p
l
i
t
u
d
e
s
 
i
n
 
j
t
h
 
d
i
r
e
c
t
i
o
n
.
Note 
that in 
Equat
ions 
(99) 
and 
(100) 
the 
origin 
is at 
the 
center 
of 
gravit
y, 
which 
is 
assum
ed to 
lie in 
the


j = 3 represents heave;j = 5 represents pitch,
111,-I is the magnitude or absolute value of re­ 
sponse amplitude, and
ui is the phase shift of the response.
The complex amplitude is a complex number that con­ 
tains both the magnitude and phase of the response. 
For example, the magnitude and phase of the heave 
response are given by
                            (97)
where
"ifaR is the real part of 7f3


WL. The more general case is given in the next sub­ 
section.
  The determination of the coefficients and exciting 
force and moment amplitudes represents the major 
problem in any ship motion calculation. The  problem 
is simplified by applying a strip theory  (as developed 
in the next sub-section), where the ship is divided into 
transverse strips, or segments. The added mass and 
damping for each strip are relatively easily calculated, 
using two-dimensional hydrodynamic theory or by 
equivalent two-dimensional experiments. The 
sectional values are then appropriately combined to 
yield values for Aik• Bik• Sk and - For the case of 
heave and pitch in head seas Table 12 lists the 
formulas for calculating the coefficients and the 
exciting forces. Actual theo-


44	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 12-Head Sea Coefficients and Exciting Forces
Asa= f asa dx	Bsa = f bsa dx


A = - f X asa


Ua B s
w,


Bas = - f X bsa dx + Ua 
Asa



A53 = -


x asa dx	Ua Bas
w,


B53 = - f X bsa 
dx - U0 Asa
U
a
2



 
Css = f Csa dx = pg f B(x) dx


Bss = f


X 2  b88   d,x  +-	Bsa
w, 2


Css = c53 = - f X C33 d,x = -pg f X B(x) d,x
 C55   = pg V  GML + LCF2  Csa	f X 2 Csa dx = pg f X 2 B(x) dx 
FEX 8  = r'of dkx e-kr<x> [c 88   -   wO(wesaa  -   ib88)] dx
L
FExs = -{  f eikz e-kT" <z> [ x( Css - wa(w, a88-	ibas)) - i o• Wo (w, aas - ibas)] dx
L


where:	a33 is the sectional heave added mass
bsa is the sectional heave damping
  c33 is the sectional restoring force = pg B(x) 
B(x) is the sectional waterline beam
S(x) is the sectional area
T*(x) is the mean sectional draft or! :
fis the incident  wave amplitude





retical and experimental values for the sectional added 
mass and damping in heave for various section shapes 
are given in Section 3.5, and the overall coefficients 
and exciting forces are given in Section 3.7.
  In Table 12 the approximate equation for C55 is based 
on the assumption that the vertical difference between 
the centers of gravity and buoyancy, BG, and the 
longitudinal distance between CG and CF  are  both 
very small relative to the length of the ship.
  It should also be noted that the amplitudes of the 
heave and pitch exciting for e and moment listed in 
Table 12 depend  directly on  C, the incident wave am­
plitude. This is a consequence of the linear theory used 
in their development. The terms in brackets propor­ 
tional to c83 are the Froude-Krylov exciting force and 
moment, and the terms involving a 33 and b33 represent 
the hydrodynamic diffraction forces. That these forces 
are given in terms of the same added mass and damp­ 
ing coefficients used in calculating the radiation force


similar to the vertical motion of the hull relative to 
still water.
  The factor ei"" accounts for the wave profile 
along the length of the ship. Both the Froude-
Krylov and diffraction parts of the exciting forces 
and moments are multiplied by the term e-kr<x>, 
where k is the wave number and T*(x) is the mean 
draft for the section, assumed to be S(x)I B(x), 
where S(x) is the sectional area and B(x) is the local 
beam at the waterline. This is the result of the 
exponential decay of the dynamic pressure in the 
incident wave as one moves deeper below the free 
surface. This effect is often called the Smith Effect 
(Smith, 1883). For depths greater than 
approximately one wavelength no variation in 
pressure due to the incident waves can be felt. This 
decay in the incident wave dynamic pressure results 
in an equiv­ alent reduction in the magnitude of the 
exciting forces.
To solve Equations  (99) and  (100) for the  complex
amplitudes, the equations are written in the form:


coefficients, A;k and B-k, is the result of mathematical 
manipulation. Physically it can be viewed that the ver­ 
tical motion of the wave relative to the fixed hull is


P'ifo + Q 'ifs = F Ex
R Tfa + S7'fs = F Ex5


(101)


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	45


where
p = - <». 2 (a + A 83) + i<».Baa + Caa
  

3.3	Motions in Regular Waves with Six 
Degrees of
Freedom. In order to be able to compute all 
responses of any vessel to regular waves, it 
is necessary to deal


Q = -<».2A35 + i<».B35 + C35
R = - <».2A 53 + fo,.B53 + C53
S = - <».2(155 + A55) + i<».B55 + C5F,
The solutions to the coupled equations are then given 
by

_=	FEx,s  -  FEx5Q


with the complete motions of a ship  with six degrees 
of freedom, considering important couplings among 
them. The linear equations of motion will be 
presented for a ship advancing at constant mean 
forward speed with arbitrary heading a train of re lar 
sinusoi?al waves. Detailed derivations of the 
equations of motion may be found in Salvesen, et al 
(1970), Newrnan (1977),
Ogilvie (1964), or Wehall;sen (1971).. . .


'1'Js	PS - QR


(102)


(a) Equations of motion..


The lmeanzati?n of the


_=	FExr,P - FEx3R
'1'Js	PS-	QR

  The limiting forms of the solutions for Tfs and Tfs 
are easily determined from Equations (102). At the 
high-frequency limit, the exciting forces go to zero and 
therefore the motions must also approach zero. In the 
low-frequency limit, P, Q, R, and S approach the values
of their respective  hydrostatic restoring force coeffi­


equations is made on the baslS of small motions. 
The motions will in general be small if the ship is 
stable and the incident wave amplitude is relatively 
sma!l. The principal exceptions to this rule are 
resonant sit­ uations where the damping is small, 
e.g., roll reson ce in beam seas, near-pitch 
resonance of SWATH ships, heave resonance of 
semi-submersible oil-drilling ships, etc. 
Experimental and theo tical in estiga ions ave 
shown that a linear analysis of ship motions gives


cients. The low-frequency limit of  F8  and F5  are  found


excellent predictions over a wide variety of sea con­ 
ditions and vessel types (see Section 3.7),. and at


by using only the Froude-Krylov terms and expanding
the eikx term for small k. The net result is that in the 
limit of low frequency:


rolling at forward speed can be hand!ed 
satisfactonly by equivalent linear equations 
(Section 3.8). Accord­ ingly, the assumption of 
linearity will e e ined here.


1fa-+ f
1f5 - -ikf


(103)


However, in doubtful cases 
the admissibility of the 
assumptions inherent in 
linear theory can only be de­ 
termined by comparing the 
results of calculations as­ 
suming linearity with 
experimental and full-scale


Thus, for very long waves the heave amplitud ap­
proaches the wave amplitude and the pitch amplitude 
is the same as the maximum wave slope. The phasing 
is such that the vessel contours the waves. At inter­ 
mediate frequencies the ship motions may peak. De­ 
pending on speed and hull form, typical peak values 
are in the range of 1 to 2 times the wave amplitude 
for heave and 1 to 1.5 times the wave slope for pitch. 
Examples of the pitch and heave motions in head seas 
are shown in Section 3.7.
  The first strip theory for ship motions in regular 
waves was developed by Korvin-Kroukovsky (1955) to 
predict the heave and pitch motions of a vessel n head 
seas. Using concepts from slender-body theory m aero­ 
dynamics and shrewd physical insight, a linearized the­ 
ory was developed to compute all the coefficients and 
the diffraction excitations. Some refinements and ex­ 
perimental comparisons were provided in  the  sequel 
by Korvin-Kroukovsky and Jacobs (1957). Further de­ 
velopments and extension to six degrees of  freedom 
are discussed.
It is of interest to note that Equations (95), and hence
the solutions given in (102), are basically the same as 
those developed by Korvin-Kroukovsky. The formulas 
for coefficients and for excitations listed in Table 12  
are essentially the same except that they embod.y  a 
more rigorous treatment of  forward  speed  terms  m 
the coefficients and have <» <». as the multiplier in the 
excitations instead of <».2.


measurements.
  It is desirable first to define the three axis systems 
shown  in  Fig.  38. The  (x0,   Yo, z0)   system  is  fixed  in




Fig. 38 Coordinate systems


46	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



relation to the earth, with the origin at any desired 
location. The z0-axis is positive upwards and the x0-y 0 
plane (with origin 0) is usually coincident with the calm­ 
water level. The x O axis is normally set in the direction 
of travel of the ship. The (x 0 , Yo, z0 ) axis system  is 
used to define the incident wave system.
  The (x, y, z) system moves with constant velocity U0 
in the positive x0-direction, and is referred to as in­ 
ertial coordinates. The x-y plane is also aligned with 
the calm water level and z is positive upwards. The x­ 
axis is coincident with the x0-axis. The transformation 
from  the  (x0 ,   Yo, z0)  system  to the moving system is 
then given by
  

As in the simple case of a ship in head seas, 
the starting point in setting up the more 
complicated equa­ tions of motion for six degrees 
of freedom is Newton's second law, which must 
be written in an inertial co­ ordinate system. But 
the forces and moments acting on the body are 
all defined in the body-axis system. Thus, 
transformations are used in order to write the 
equations of motion in the body-axis system. 
These transformations result in the so-called 
Euler equations of motion for a rigid body, which 
are highly nonlinear. For this reason most ship 
motion investigations first linearize the 
equations before attempting a solution.
  The general form of the basic linearized  
equations  in six degrees of freedom using body 
axes is,


 
Yo= Y	(104)


I	Ajk 11k(t) = Flt)
k = 1



j  = 1,2 ...   6	(106)


Zo  = Z
The x, y, z axis system (body axes) is fixed in the


where A1k are the components of the generalized inertia


ship and therefore moves with all the motions of the 
ship. The x-y plane coincides with the ship's calm wa­ 
terplane, with the z-axis normal to it (positive upward) 
and the x-axis pointing out the bow. In all the work 
described in this chapter it will be assumed that the 
ship has port/ starboard symmetry and the x-z plane
is the plane of symmetry. Hence, the origin is in the 
center plane, in the calm waterplane and at any con­ 
venient fore-and-aft location, such as amidships.
  The motions of the ship are determined by the ori­ 
entation of the x, y, z system relative tQ the x, y, z


matrix tor the ship, in which the mass and moment 
of inertia terms, A and /, and all possible 
couplings, are included. 11k are the accelerations 
in mode k; Fi rep­ resent the total forces or 
moments acting on  the body in direction j. The 
quantities Fj, as well as 'T/k, are harmonic 
functions of time.
  In linearizing the equations many of  the terms  
in  Aik become zero, and Abkowitz (1969) has 
shown that for a ship with lateral symmetry (106) 
reduces to the following six explicit equations:
                         (surge)


system. A total of six components are needed to 
uniquely define the motion, typically three translations 
and three rotations. The three translations are defined


A ( 112 - Ze 114 + Xe 116) = F2 A (11s  -   Xe115)  =  Fs
 

(sway) (heave)


as surge, sway, and heave. The corresponding rota­ 
tions of the x, y, and z axes are called roll, pitch and 
yaw, respectively, Fig. 37.
  It should be noted that with a ship moving at any 
angle, µ, to regular waves the frequency of oscillation 
will be shifted to the frequency of wave encounter,






where


/44 114 -  /46 116 - Aze 112 = F4	(roll)
/55 115 + A {ze111 -	Xe11s ) = F5 (pitch)
(yaw)


(107)


w,  = W0-	w/ Uo COS /J, = W0-	k  U0   COS µ	(105)


F1{ t), j = 1,2,3 are the total forces in the x, y, z di­


g

This shift is directly analogous to the Doppler shift in 
sound and electro-magnetic theory. For waves coming 
from ahead (µ = 180 deg) the frequency of encounter 
is higher than the absolute frequency.  In stern seas 
(µ = 0 deg) the frequency of encounter is lower and 
may equal zero when the ship speed equals the phase 
velocity of the waves. For very high speeds in stern 
seas the frequency of encounter may obtain negative 
values. This corresponds to the case where the ship 
overtakes the waves so that the waves actually appear 
to be coming from ahead (Section 4). We shall see that 
the ship responds at the frequency of encounter and
consequently the frequency shift caused by forward 
speed has a strong influence on the ship motions.


rections, respectively
F1{t), j = 4,5,6  are  the total moments  acting 
about
the  x, y,  and  z axes.  Positive mo­
ments are in the right-hand sense
A is total mass of vessel
ljj,j = 4,5,6 are moments of inertia 
around the x. y, z axes, 
respectively
/ 46 is roll - yaw product of inertia
= 164
(xe, 0, zJ are coordinates of the center 
of gravity of the ship in the x, y, 
z sys­ tem.
11it> is acceleration in the P" degree of free­
dom, where j = 1,2,3 .... 6 
refers to surge, sway, heave, 
roll, pitch and yaw, 
respectively.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	47


It should always be kept in mind that the equations 
for j = 1,2,3 are force equations and for j = 4,5,6 are 
moment equations.
  Comparing (106) to (107), the generalized inertia ma­ 
trix is:
  

In a linear theory, the responses of  the vessel  will  be 
linear with (i.e., directly proportional to) wave am­ plitude 
and occur at the frequency at which the ship perceives the 
incident waves. This is an important point. The use of 
linear analysis allows us to use the powerful analysis 
techniques of linear system theory and obtain many useful 
results. However, it also puts limitations on the results 
which must be recognized.
Since only the vessel response to sinusoidal waves is


!:,,.jk =


(108)


being 
consider
ed in 
this 
section, 
the 
time-
depende
nt 
respons
es of the 
vessel, 
11,{t), 
will be 
sinusoid
al at the 
frequen
cy of 
encount
er and 
can be 
written 
as:



This matrix can be readily evaluated in any specific 
case. Of course, if the origin is vertically in line with 
the center of gravity, all Xe terms will be zero (as in  
the simple head-sea case of Section 3.2).
  As presented in Equation (107), the Fi represent the 
total forces (or moments) acting on the vessel resolved 
in the x, y, z body-axis system. Likewise, iji are the 
accelerations resolved in the body-axis system. In the 
formulation and solving of the hydrodynamic problems 
associated with ship motion it is often more convenient 
to work in the x, y, z or inertial system. As far as the 
linearized equations of motion are concerned, the res­
olution of the forces, moments, and motion amplitudes 
into one system or the other does not matter. The 
distinction between the two systems has been lost in 
the linearization. For the remainder of this section we 
shall in general work in the inertial (x,y,z) reference 
frame. However, one must always be· aware of the 
distinction between the two coordinate systems so that 
in the development of a linear hydrodynamic theory 
all the terms of the appropriate order of magnitude 
are retained.
  The only product of inertia that appears is /46, the roll-
yaw product, which vanishes if the ship has fore­ and-
aft symmetry and is small otherwise. The other 
nondiagonal elements all vanish if the origin of the 
coordinate system coincides with the center of gravity 
of the ship; however, it is more convenient to take the 
origin in the waterplane at midship, in which case Xe 
and Zc are not equal to zero.
  Writing Euler's equations of motion, Equations 
(106), with only gravitational and fluid forces acting 
on the ship results in

L t,,.jk '1Jk = Fit) = FGj + FHj


j  = 1,2 ...  6
where,
w, is the frequency of encounter (105), and equals
                          (110)
,f; is the complex amplitude of vessel response in the 
jth direction and j = 1,2 ....6 refer to surge, sway, 
heave, roll, pitch, yaw, respectively.
  The gravitational forces are simply due to the weight of 
the vessel applied at the center of gravity. Since the 
mean gravitational forces cancel the mean buoyant 
forces, they are usually combined with the hydrostatic 
part of the fluid forces to give the net hydrostatic 
forces.
  The hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces acting on the 
ship are obtained by integrating the fluid pressure over the 
underwater portion of the hull. The compo­ nents of the 
fluid forces acting in each of the six de­ grees of freedom 
are thus given by

          j  = 1,2, ...  ,6	(111)
where
ni is the generalized unit normal to the hull sur­ 
face into the hull
P is the fluid pressure
s is the underwater hull surface area
  The components of the generalized normal are equal to 
the usual hull surface normals for the translation
modes  (j   =  1,2,3) and equal  to the  moments  of  the


k-1


j = 
1,2	6


(109)


unit normals 
for the 
rotational 
modes (j = 
4,5,6). Con­ 
sequently, it 
may be written 
that


where
FGi is the component of the gravitational force 
acting on the vessel in the Ph direction.
FHi is the component of the fluid force acting in




where


(n1, n2, na) = n
(n4,  ns, ns) =	X


(112)


the vessel in the j th direction.
t,,.i" is the inertia matrix given by Equation (108).


n is the unit normal to the hull surface out of 
the fluid


48	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


r is the vector from origin to a point on the
-	hull
= X! + yj + z"!£.
  The pressure on the body can be found using Ber­ 
noulli's equation. Assuming an inviscid and irrotational 
flow, the equation for the pressure is
P	½pU/	a<1> - ½p (V<I> X  V<I>) -   pgz	(113)


where
Fnsj =  hydrostatic  force  on  the  body  in  the  p11
direction.
F"nsi = net hydrostatic force on the body in the 
jth
direction.
  The final results for each of the six 
components for a vessel with port-starboard 
symmetry are:
where


where p is density, V<I> is the total velocity vector 
representing the fluid flow, and U0  is the forward speed 
of the ship. The assumption of inviscid, irrotational 
flow is critical because it allows the development of a 
linear theory. However, the effects of viscosity and 
vortex shedding have been lost. For some cases (par­ 
ticularly roll and yaw) this may not be satisfactory 
and empirical corrections have to be added at a later


F"ns1 = O
F"ns2   = 0
F"ns3  = -   pgS"fla + pgS1"11s
F"ns, = -pgV (S22/V + ZB - zc) 7l4
= -pgVGMT"f14


(116)(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)


stage.
  In Equation (113), the first three terms represent 
the hydrodynamic contributions to the pressure and 
the last term represents the hydrostatic contribution. 
When the equation for the pressure is substituted into 
Equation (111), the fluid forces acting on the vessel 
may be divided into the following hydrostatic and hy­


F"nss = pgS1"f13 -  pgV (S1/V + ZB - zc) "fls	(e)
= pgS1"f13 -   pgV (GML + S LCF2 /V )"f15
F"ns6  = 0	(f)
where


drodynamic contributions:
Fni = Fnsi + FnDi
where
F8  8i  (hydrostatic)  =  -  pg JJz ni ds	(114a)
S'
FHD· (hydrodynamic) =
J
-p	JJ (½U/  -	-  ½ V<I>.  V<I>) nids	(114b)
S'

  In order to find expressions for the above to insert 
into the equations of motion, the hydrostatic and hy­ 
drodynamic forces will be considered separately.
  (a)	Net hydrostatic forces. To find the hydrostatic 
forces we must evaluate the integrals in Equation


GMT is the transverse metacentric height
GML is the longitudinal metacentric height
zB is the vertical center of buoyancy location
LCF is the longitudinal center of flotation
Sis  the waterplane area=	B(x) dx
S1 is the first moment of waterplane area 
around the y-axis
=	xB(x)dx
S11 is the second moment of waterplane area 
around the y-axis
=	x2B(x)dx
S22 is the second moment of waterplane area 
around the x-axis


(114a), a straightforward but tedious process. The 
value of z must be replaced by its equivalent values 
in the (x, y, z) system and the integrals evaluated over 
the instantaneous underwater hull surface. Note that 
in linear theory the integrals need only be carried out 
on the instantaneous wetted surface up to the calm 
water level, since the contributions from the small area
between the calm water level and the actual wavy 
water surface are of a higher order.
  The details of the integral evaluation may be found 
in Newman (1977). Because the mean hydrostatic 
forces are cancelled by the mean gravitational forces, 
the two are usually combined to give the net hydro­ 
static force as follows:
j  = 1,2,...  ,6	(115)


=  JI y2dydx  =	[Bi;)]3dx
s
B(x) is the full breadth of waterplane at x
  In order to simplify the notation, the individual 
force components expressed in Equations (116) 
can be writ­ ten in a more general matrix notation 
as
F* HSj = - L cjk Tfkefu>et	(117)
j
-
1

where
½k are the hydrostatic restoring force 
coefficients and 71k e;.,•1      replaces   the   
arbitrary   motions,
"flk(t).


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	49


  The hydrostatic restoring force coefficients give the 
net hydrostatic force acting on the vessel in the jth 
direction due to a unit displacement  in the  kth  mode 
of motion. The values of C;k are found by comparing
(116) and (117). The final results are:
         except for the values
C3a  = pg JB(x) dx
J


cf>r is the unsteady perturbation potential
= <1>1 + <t>v + I	<t>/rf;
j=       1
<f,1 is the incident wave potential
<f>v is the diffracted wave potential
<f,. is the radiation potential due to unit motion
;	in jth direction
  Note that <f,r, cf>v, <f,i are all independent of time and 
depend only on space variables. The steady part of <1>


C3s =   Css =  -pg	xB(x)dx

C44 = pgV GMr



(118)


results from the steady forward 
speed of the vessel. The - U0x term 
is the free-steam velocity and the 4's 
is the steady perturbation velocity 
potential due to t e presence of the 
ship hull. The term (:-- Uox + .4's) 
1s the solution to the problem of the 
ship advancmg at


2
C55 = pgV ( GML + -..,-S)


::::: pg S 11


constant forward speed in 
otherwise calm water. The 
velocity due to the steady 
advance of the vessel is 
given by


= pg S11 + pg V (KB - KG) 
where all integrals are taken over the length of the 
ship.
  For many ships the vertical difference between the 
center of gravity and the center of buoyancy is very 
small relative to the length of the ship, so that in this 
case C55 can be approximated as
J


W = V (- U 0 x + </>8 ) = - U0 + '7cf>s (121)
where V is the gradient differential operator.
  The unsteady part contains all the time-dependent 
terms. As with the response amplitude, Equation (110), 
the time dependence is sinusoidal at the frequency of 
encounter. The unsteady part is subdivided into the 
incident wave potential 4>1 , the diffracted wave poten­


  It should be noted  that,  after  appropriate  changes 
in units, the hydrostatic restoring  fore  coefficients, C-
k, are equivalent to the hydrostatic coefficients used id 
ship  stability  calculations.  Tons per  cm,  change in
displacement per cm of trim aft, righting moment per 
degree of heel, and moment to trim one cm are related


in each degree of freedom. The potentials <f,1 and <l>v 
result from solving the diffraction problem where 
incident waves act upon the vessel in its equilibrium 
position. The diffracted waves result from the 
scatter­ ing of the incident waves as they strike t e 
?ody. The hydrodynamic forces that result fro t?e 
mc1dent plus


to C33 , C35 , Cw and C55 , respectively.


diffracted  waves  are   called  the  
exciting   forces. The
radiation  potentials  (<f,i) are  the 
solution to the ra ia­


  (b)	Hydrodynamic forces. The hydrodynamic 
forces acting on the vessel can be found by evaluating 
Equation (114b ). To accomplish this the total velocity 
potential for the fluid flow, <1>(x, y, z, t ), must be known. 
At the present state of the art, this is impossible, so 
that several simplifications are necessary. The first is 
to assume that the total velocity potential can be sub­ 
divided into a simple summation of the various com­ 
ponents as follows:
<1>(x, y, z, t) = [ - U 0 x + <f,8 (x, y, z)] + <fr> e;.,•1
= [- U0 x + 4's(x, y, z)]


tion problem in which the vessel undergoes prescnbed 
oscillatory motion in each of the six degrees of 
freedom in otherwise calm water. The hydrodynamic 
forces that result from the radiation problem involve 
added mass and damping.
  The subdivision of the complete velocity potential 
into the components shown in (120) is not unique. 
Other subdivisions are possible, but the one shown has 
the advantage that the various contributions to the total 
potential are easily identifiable. In addition, the 
1:0otion amplitudes, if;, are separated fr?m the 
potentials  so that the potentials can be found 
mdependently of the








where,


ste
ad
y 
pa
rt	(120)

+ [4'1 
+ <I> D 
+ j*I 
<I>/'i'f;] 
e;.,,1
un
st
ea
dy 
pa
rt


body 
motio
n. The 
intera
ctions 
betwe
en the 
variou
s un­ 
steady 
comp
onent
s are 
all of 
higher 
order 
and 
are 
negle
cted 
in 
linear 
theory
. As 
with 
the 
motio
n 
ampli
­ 
tudes 
the 
assum
ption 
of 
linear 
theory 
has 
allow
ed 
simpli
ficatio
n but 
at the 
cost 
of 
other 
harmo
nics 
in the 
respo
nse 
and 
intera
ctions 
betwe
en the 
unstea
dy 
com­ 
ponen
ts.
Th
e 
ste
ad
y 
co
mp
on
ent 
(- 
U0 
x 
+ 
cf>
s) 
is 
the 
sol
uti
on
to the 
wave 
resistanc
e 
problem 
in calm 
water 
and can


cf>sis  the  perturbation  potential  due  to  steady 
translation


be determined independently of the unsteady compo­ 
nents. In a consistent linear theory the boundary value


50	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE
problem that must be solved to determine the unsteady




(a)


components  depends  on  q,8•    Both  the  boundary  con­ 
ditions on the hull and the free surface contain terms 
involving q,8  •  Thus, there is an interaction between the 
steady  and  unsteady  components.  Unfortunately,  de­
veloping a  ship  motion  theory that  properly accounts


F'/ is the complex amplitude of the exciting force 
component due to incident waves, usu­ 
ally called the Froude-Krylov exciting 
force, and equals


for this interaction is extremely difficult. For this rea­ 
son, the interactions are usually ignored and the steady
component is approximated by the free-stream value 
(- U0 x ) in the unsteady problem. However, neglecting


-pf fni (iw. - U0 !) cf>i ds
s



(b)


the interaction between the steady and unsteady per­ 
turbation potentials has significant effects on the ship 
motion predictions for high-speed ships and such prob­ 
lems as green water on deck and slamming. Hence,


F/ is the complex amplitude of the exciting force
component due to diffracted waves, 
usu­ ally called the diffraction exciting 
force, equalling


the interaction between the steady and unsteady prob­ 
lems has become an important area of current re­ 
search. Further discussion can be found in Newman 
(1978) or Ogilvie (1977). Troesch (1981) uses the theory


-pf fni (iw. - U0 !) cf>D ds
s



(c)	


developed  by Ogilvie and Tuck  (1969) to compute the
interaction in lateral motions. Inglis and Price (1981) 
use  three-dimensional  numerical  techniques  to  com­


FR. is the hydrodynamic force in the j th direction
1	due to forced motion, represented by


pute the magnitude of the effects.
  For the linear development  of  strip theory presented
in this chapter, it is assumed that the steady velocity 
component  can  be approximated  by the free-stream


-p  II nj (iw. - Uo :x) ctlq,k rjk eio'•1
s
ktl


ds	(d)


value. In this case, the value of  Wis approximated   by:
W:::::: ( -  U 0 , 0, 0)	(122)


=	[-pf fni (iw. - U0  :x)  q,k ds]  rjkeiw•t
s


In addition, the nonlinearities associated with the V<I> 
X 7<1> term in the Bernoulli equation (113) are also 
dropped. Thus, the unsteady pressure equation be­ 
comes

P :::::: -p	[ iw,	- U0 :x] 4'r eiw•t	(123)
  

For convenience the above quantity in brackets is 
designated ½k• so that
½k = -pf fni (iw. - U0:x) q,k ds
s



Using the approximation for the unsteady pressure 
given by (123), the expression, (114b), for the unsteady 
hydrodynamic force acting on the vessel reduces to


and

 




(126)


FHDi  ::::::   -pf f ni     [  iw.	-  U0 !] qT, eiw•1ds	(124)
s

where, consistent with the linearization, the integra­ 
tion is carried out over the mean underwater hull sur­ 
face S. The tilde (~) over the hydrodynamic force 
denotes that only the unsteady hydrodynamic forces 
are being considered.
Substituting the form of q,T from Equation (120) into
(124)	results in two distinct sets of unsteady forces 
acting on the vessel as follows:


where ½k 'ifk is the complex amplitude of the 
hydro­ dynamic force in the j th direction due to 
forced motion in the kth direction.
  1.	Exciting forces. The exciting force 
amplitudes given in Equations (125b) and (125c) 
are the forces and moments that excite the 
motions of the vessel. Ff re­ sults from the 
integration over  the  body  surface  of the 
pressure which would exist in the wave system if 
the body were not present. This component is 
easily calculated since no hydrodynamic problem 
need be solved. The incident wave potential is 
known and only
needs to be integrated  over the  body surface. F/ is
usually  called  the Froude-Krylov  exciting force  after




where


FHD· = 
FEX· 
+ FR.


(125)	


t
h
e
 
c
l
a
s
s
i
c
a
l
 
w
o
r
k
 
o
n
 
s
h
i
p
 
r
o
l
l
i
n
g
 
d
o
n
e
 
b
y
 
F
r
o
u
d
e
 
(
1
8
6
1
)
,
 
a
n
d
 
g
e
n
e
r
a
l
i
z
e
d
 
t
o
 
6
 
d
e
g
r
e
e
s
 
o
f
 
f
r
e
e
d
o
m
 
(
K
r
y
­
 
l
o
v
,
 
1
8
9
8
)
.
 
T
h
e
y
 
w
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
r
s
t
 
t
o
 
m
a
k
e
 
t
h
e
 
a
p
p
r
o
x
i
­
 
m
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
u
s
i
n
g
 
o
n
l
y
 
t
h
e
 
i
n
c
i
d
e
n
t
 
w
a
v
e
 
p
o
t
e
n
t
i
a
l
 
i
n


FEx- are the exciting forces in thejth direction, and
J	equal


computing the total exciting force. The Froude-Krylov 
approximation increases in accuracy as the wavelength


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	51



of the incident waves increases relative to the body 
dimensions. For short wave-lengths the diffraction po­ 
tential cannot be neglected; in the limit of very short 
waves the total exciting force is approximately doubled 
over the Froude-Krylov approximation.
The second component of  the  exciting force, Fl, is
caused by the diffraction of the incident waves due to 
the presence of the vessel. Mathematically the dif­ 
fraction potential is necessary so that the combination
of (<f> 1 + <f>D) meets the body boundary condition. In 
fact, it can be shown that F/ can be  determined  with­ 
out ever solving for <f>D (Newman, 1977). Because 4>i
and <f>D solve very similar mathematical problems, the 
Green theorem and the body boundary condition  can 
be used to derive the so-called Haskind Relations. 
These relations relate the diffraction exciting force to 
the incident wave and radiation potentials. They allow
the computation  of F/ without having to solve for the
diffraction potential. This is important because  it 
means substantial savings in computer time for ship 
motion programs. The development of strip theory in 
the next subsection will make use of the Haskind Re­ 
lations.
  2. Radiation forces. The final components of the 
unsteady hydrodynamic force are the radiation forces, 
FR. These forces result from the radiation of waves 
avJay from a vessel that is forced to oscillate in the
kth  mode of motion in otherwise calm water. The term
½k in Equation (125d) is seen to represent the hydro­ 
dynamic force on the vessel in the jth direction due to 
unit amplitude motion in the kth direction. It is effec­ 
tively a transfer function from unit motion in the kth 
mode to  hydrodynamic force in the  jth  mode. The real
and imaginary parts of ½k are usually separated as
                    (127)
From Equation (125c),

FR. =  L (w.2 Aik  -   iw.  Bik)'ifk ;e '"•1	(128)
J	k = 1
where
Aik is the added mass in the Ph mode due to unit 
motion in the k th direction, Re (½kl w.2).
B;k is the damping coefficient in the j th mode due 
to  unit  motion  in   the   ktJi  direction, 
Im (- ½kl w.).
  The products w.2 and -iw. areincluded in the def­ 
inition of Aik and B'k for convenience when the terms 
are substituted back into the equations of motion. The 
names added mass and damping are chosen because 
of the physical significance the terms have in the equa­ 
tions of motion. As we shall see, the real part of the 
hydrodynamic force due to forced motion is in phase 
with the acceleration. Thus it acts as an apparent mass, 
adding to the mass of the body. Likewise, the damping 
term is the hydrodynamic force on the body that is in



phase with the velocity. It should also be noted that 
in general the added mass and damping are 
functions of frequency.
  Various techniques have been developed to 
compute the exciting forces and the added mass and 
damping.  In the next sub-section the strip theory 
technique will be discussed.
(c) Linearized equations of motion. The expres­
sions for all the different forces can now be 
substituted back into the equations of motion (109). ij 
k can be expressed, from (110), as
71k   =  -w.211k e;,,,•1
Taking account of the various force components de­ 
veloped in the preceding paragraphs, the right-hand 
side becomes
Fi = Fe; + FHi = Fe;+ (FHs; + FHD)
;=(Fe.+ FHs->	(FEx•	FR.)	(129)
J	J	J	J
= F* HS; + FEX; + FR;
Equation (109) then becomes
6
F = -w 2 t:. ;;;;- ei'"•1- F* + F + F
j  = 1,2,...6  (130)
Replacing F* Hs-, FEx• and FR. by their components,
J	J	J
given in (117), (125), and (128), gives
L  -  w.2 t:.jk 11k ei,,,•t =  -  L cjk 'ifi!i,,,•t + F/ei'"•1
k=I	k=l

 
+ F/  ei "'•1   +  L (w.2 A;k  -   iw.  B;k)'ifk ;e "'•1
k=l
(131)
  Finally the hydrostatic restoring forces, the  added 
mass, and damping terms are all brought  to  the  left­ 
hand side of the equations  and  the e;,,,,i are  eliminated 
to yield the governing equations:



(132)

The right-hand side, F/ + F/, represents the two 
com­ ponents of the exciting force amplitude, as 
defined in Equation (125).
  Equations (132) are the linearized equations of mo­ 
tion for an unrestrained vessel in sinusoidal waves. 
There are six coupled, linear equations for the six 
unknown complex amplitudes, Tfk• The mass matrix 
(t:.;k) is given in Equation (108). The hydrostatic re­ 
storing force coefficient matrix (C;k) is presented in 
(117). The coefficients for added mass (A;k), 
damping


52	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


(B;k) and the exciting force complex  amplitudes (F/,
F P) are found by evaluating the integrals in Equations 
(125), (126) and (128). The evaluation requires the S?· 
lution of the radiation and diffraction problems, and m
the next subsection a strip theory to solve these prob­ 
lems will be discussed.
  The equations of motion (132) look very similar to 
the equations of motion for a spring-mass-damper sys­ 
tem with six degrees of freedom. There are mass terms
(a .k + A .k), damping  terms (B;k) and spring constants 
( (\)    on  the left-hand  side. The exciting  forces (F/ +
F.b) are  on  the  right-hand  side.  The  cross-coupling 
b tween the modes results from the terms  where  j is 
not equal to k. The cross-coupling may be large  or 
small depending on the modes of motion and the ge­ 
ometry of the vessel.
  As previously noted, the principal difference between 
the equations of motion (132) and the simple spring­



TWO-DIMENSIONAL STRIP



z	X














HEAVE
MOTION WAVES


mas.§.:damper system is that the coefficients A;k, J!;k, 
Ff,Fl are all functions of frequency. For the typical 
spring-mass-damper they are all constants. The fre­
quency dependence of the coefficients_ in the equat ons 
of motion is the reason we cannot write the equations 
of motion in their usual differential equation form. 
Essentially we are solving the equations in the fre­ 
quency domain where the coefficients are constant for 
a given frequency.
  The mass term contains both the natural mass (or 
moments of inertia) of the vessel and the hydrody­ 
namic added mass. The damping term is _the result of 
wave damping of the free surface. The ei'.fects o_f vis­ 
cous damping have been neglec ed; but 1f th mco:· 
poration	of   an	equivalent	viscous    da pmg	is 
necessary, it can be added to the Bik term. Fmally t e 
spring constant terms are the r sult of the hydrostatic 
restoring forces and are proportional to the waterplane 
area. For modes of motion in which there are no hy­ 
drostatic restoring forces,  the  spring  constant  terms 
are  zero. For example, the spring constant  term in yaw  
( c66) is zero.
  For an arbitrarily  shaped  vessel  the  six  equations 
of motion must be solved  simultaneously.  However, 
for the case of an unrestrained ship with port/ star­ 
board symmetry the six equations in (132) may be 
uncoupled into two sets of three equations. The ver­ 
tical-plane or longitudinal motions (s rge, heave and 
pitch) are uncoupled from the horizontal-plane r 
transverse motions (sway, roll, and yaw). To see  this 
we note that the cross coupling values of aik and  C;k  
are zero if j = 1,3,5 and k = 2,4,6 or vice versa (for 
example,  C12     =  M86     =  M6s = C4s	0). As can be 
seen by examining Equations (125c) and (127), the 
same is true for A-k and B;k· For example, A2s and B23 
are the added mas and damping in sway due to heave. 
From (125c) and (127) we have




TWO-DIMENSIONAL STRIP
Fig. 39 Two-dimensionol strip in heave




The right-hand side equals zero because n 2 is an odd 
function of the port and starboard sides while <Pa is an 
even function. Consequently the integral over the en­ 
tire hull surface must equal zero. Physically, it means 
that there is no hydrodynamic force in the sway di­ 
rection due to a heave motion.
  It should be noted that the lack of coupling between 
the vertical and horizontal modes is a consequence of 
linear theory. In nonlinear theories such cross-coupling 
may be present. For some ship motion problems this 
nonlinear coupling can be very important. For exam­ 
ple, there is a nonlinear heave-roll cross-coupling that 
can lead to roll instabilities and eventual ship capsizing 
(Kerwin, 1955) or (Ogilvie and Beck, 1973). Another 
example is the nonlinear pitch-yaw coupling that re­ 
sults from varying submergence of the bow due  to 
pitch motion (Korvin-Kroukovsky, 1980).
  It should also be pointed out that the final equations 
of motion (132) are valid as long as the vessel is in 
sinusoidal waves and the responses are linear. Using 
different hydrodynamic theories will lead to different 
values of the added mass, damping and exciting forces, 
but the form of the equations remains the same. The 
effects of mooring lines, anti-roll fins, rudder, etc. can 
be added to the equations of motion by modifying the 
appropriate coefficients. Whether or not the  vertic l 
and horizontal plane motions are then uncoupled will 
depend on the form of the coefficients.
  Assuming values for all the coefficients (Aik• aik• 
B-k, C-k) and the exciting forces (F/, F/) are known, 
the equations of motion can be solved using standard


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	53



techniques for the solution _of com lex simul1:3-neous 
equations. For heave and pitch motion alone m head 
seas the solution was given in Section 3.2.
  In' the next sub-section a method to determine the 
coefficients and exciting forces is given.
  3.4	Strip Theory. Obtaining numerical  values  for 
the complex motion amplitudes, 1Jk, requires that_ al­ 
ues for the coefficients a1k  ,  A 1k  ,  B 1k  , C1k  and the excitmg
force amplitudes F/, F/ can be determin d and the


plete history of the development of theoretical methods 
to predict ship motions in regular waves.
  The previously mentioned Korvin-Kroukovsky and 
Jacobs (1957) strip theory has been modified nd ex­ 
tended by many researchers. The most notable 1s prob­ 
ably the work of Gerritsma and Beuke man (1967). 
Their coefficients have been used extensively for the 
verification of strip theory against  experi  ental  re­ 
sults (Gerritsma and Beukelman, 1966), (Smith, 1967),


equations of motion solved. The mass matrix, a , and


(Salvesen and Smith, 1970), (Smith and Salvesen, 1969,


the hydrostatic restoring forces, C


1	1970) and (Loukakis, 
1971).


                                          1/\, can be evaruated 
directly by Equations (108) and (117J. The Fr?ude- {ry­ 
lov exciting force can also be found by a direct m 
gration of the incident wave potential over the  ship 
hull. The major difficulty in determining the ship mo­ 
tions is to perform  the calculati?ns needed	find !he 
coefficients of added mass, dampmg and the diffraction 
exciting forces, which requires the soluti n of difficult 
hydrodynamic problems. In this subsection we sha_ll 
discuss a strip theory to compute the hydrodynamic 
forces. In a subsequent subsection  a  brief  discussion 
of other techniques to compute the coefficients will be 
given.
  (a) Background. While the details of th mat!ie­ 
matical formulation for strip theory are still bemg 
debated, the physical assumptions are relatively easy 
to describe. First, it must be assumed that the vessel 
is a slender body, (i.e., its beam and draft are much 
less than the length and changes in cross-section vary 
gradually along the length). Restricting the discussion 
to zero forward speed and high frequencies, we woul? 
find that the fluid flow velocities in the transverse di­ 
rection are much greater than in the longitudinal di­
  

Even though the strip theories of Korvin-Kro 
kov­ sky and others have given reason ble  co 
pansons with experiments, they were not entirely 
satisfactory. In general they were valid only for 
head seas. Fur­ thermore, the forward-speed terms 
in the coefficients of the equations of motion did 
not satisfy the sym­ metry relations of Timman and 
New an ( 962). T e Timman-Newman relations state 
that ma lmear ship­ motion theory the cross-
coupling coefficients between the various modes of 
motion have certain symmetry properties. If a linear 
ship-motion theory does not have these symmetry 
properties, it must be in error. For these reasons, 
work has continued into the development of strip 
theories in order to give them a sou der. ath­ 
ematical foundation and more general apphcab1hty.
  Ogilvie and Tuck (1969) (cf. O ilvie, 1977) ave 
er­ formed a mathematically consistent analysis 
usmg slender-body theory. Their analysis reveals 
that the leading order terms involve only the zero-
speed pure strip-theory coefficients. The effects of 
forward spe d are of a slightly higher order and are 
presen! only m the cross-coupling coefficients. The 
cross-couplmg coef­
ficients  include  a  term  that is linearly  proportional to


rection.  Consequently,  as  shown  in Fig. 39, the  flow
field at  any cross section  of  the ship may be approxi­


U0 but involves the square of the potential ove t e


mated by the assumed two-dimensional flow in that 
strip. To obtain the total effect on the ship, the effects 
of all individual strips are integrated along the length. 
For example, the strip theory approximation for the 
heave added mass is
i


free surface. These integral terms make the Ogilvie­ 
Tuck coefficients impractical for routine calculations. 
Wang (1976) has re-derived the results from an enerzy 
analysis and Troesch (1981) has extend d the analy 1s 
to horizontal-plane motions. Computat10ns by Faltin­ 
sen (1975) and Troesch (1981) sh?w improv:ed agr e­ 
ment of the resulting cross-couplmg coefficients with



where


Aaa  =	a33 (x) dx	(134)


expe
rime
nts. 
The 
n t  
effe t  
o  
the  
integ
r l  
term
s  on 
the 
predi
ction
s of 
ship 
moti
ons 
1s 
not 
estab
lishe
d. 
How
­ 
ever, 
Ogil
vie 
(197
7) 
repor
ts 
that 
the 
use 
o.f 
the 
com
plete


a 33


(x) is 
the 
two-
dimens
ional 
added 
mass.


O
gil
vi
e-
Tu
ck 
co
eff
ici
en
ts 
in 
a 
no
rm
al 
stn
p-
th
eo
ry 
co
m­
pu
ter 
pr
og
ra
m 
te
nd
s 
to 
w
or
se
n 
th
e 
pr
ed
ict
io
ns 
of 
th
e


 L denotes that the integration is taken over the ship 
length.
  The sectional  added  mass,  a33 ,   is found  by solving 
the two-dimensional hydrodynamic problem shown in 
Fig. 39. The essence  of  strip  theory  is thus  to red ce 
a three-dimensional hydrodynamic problem to a senes 
of two-dimensional problems which are easier to solve. 
For low frequencies and vessels with high forward 
speed the strip theory approximation is no longer 
straightforward and different initial assumptions  lead 
to different formulations. Newman (1978) gives a com-


pitch and heave motions. This indicates that there must 
be other errors in the strip-theory approach; presum- 
ably in the exciting force terms.	.
There are  several analyses that are not as ngorous
as the Ogilvie-Tuck  approach,  bu   which are bas  on 
a stronger mathematical foundation than the original 
Korvin-Kroukovsky theory. The works of Salv sen, 
Tuck and Faltinsen (1970), Soding (1969), Tasa1 and 
Takaki (1969) and Borodai and Netsvetayev (1969) 
were all developed independently and at about  the 
same time. Newman (1977) gives only results for heave


54	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



and pitch motions in head seas. His added mass and 
damping coefficients are the same as Salvesen, et al 
(1970), but the exciting forces are computed using two­ 
dimensional results at the absolute wave frequency, 
rather than the frequency of encounter.  All  the 
methods are quite similar and the Salvesen, et al (1970), 
approach seems to have gained the widest acceptance. 
Therefore, it will be followed in this section.
The derivation of strip theory can be found in Ap­


nk (or n) is the_generalized unit normal into the 
hull discussed later.
mk is the generalized vector involving the 
gra­ dient of the forward speed 
potential.
The mk vector is often approximated (as it is in 
Sal­ vesen, et al, 1970) by
mk :::::: (0, 0, 0, 0, n 3 , -	n 2)
	(137)


pendix 1 of Salvesen, Tuck and Faltinsen (1970) and 
will not be reproduced here. In the summary of the 
theory that follows, two aspects of that original der­ 
ivation will be modified. The first modification is the 
elimination of the transom stern corrections. These 
corrections result when Stokes' theorem is applied to 
underwater hull forms that are abruptly terminated. 
However it has been found in practice that the ship 
motion p edictions are usually better if the transom 
stern corrections are omitted. This is consistent  with 
the Standard Ship Motion Program used by the U.S. 
Navy (Meyers, Applebee and Baitis, 1981).
  The second modification concerns the surge degree 
of freedom. Salvesen, et al (1970) included surge mo­ 
tion only up to the point in their analysis where the 
hydrodynamic forces associated  with surge become of 
a higher order. Various experiments have shown that 
the cross-coupling between surge motion and the other 
modes is normally small. As a result, it is usually 
neglected. However, surge is becoming more crit cal 
for certain specific problem  areas,  such  as  refuelmg 
at sea, towing in a seaway or broaching. M?i'e rese rch 
into surge motion needs to be done; particularly  mto 
the coupling between the response of the propeller and
the unsteady wake caused by the surge.  Meanwhile,


This approximation greatly simplifies the 
calculation but results in the loss of some 
forward speed effects.
  On the free surface, <f>k must satisfy the 
linearized free surface boundary condition
   (iw.   -   Uo ax	<f>k + g iz<t'k = 0 on z = 0	(138)
At infinity, the boundary conditions require that 
the gradient of <f>k go to zero and that there be 
only out­ going waves. As discussed in 
Subsection 3.6, there are numerical methods to 
solve directly the complete three­ dimensional 
problem for <f>k, but they require a large 
computational effort. In strip theory, the 
mathematical problem for <f>k is reduced to a 
series of simpler two­ dimensional problems.
  The body boundary condition, Equation (136) 
leads to two separate components for <f>k, one 
meeting the nk terms and the other the mk terms. 
These compo­ nents both satisfy the same 
boundary  conditions  on the free surface and at 
infinity. If the simplified form for the mk terms 
(137) is used, then the two components are 
directly related since they solve the equivalent 
boundary value problems. In  particular,  
Salvesen,  et al show that


in the discussion that follows, the surge degree of 
freedom has been included by a straight-forward ex­


A,.  -A,.0
'l'k-	'l'k
<f>s = <f>s° + (U


k = 1, 2, 3, 4
iw,) <f>a°



(139)


tension of the method of Salvesen, et al (1970).
  (b)	Radiation problem. To find  the  added  mass 
and damping coefficients (Aik and Bik), it should be 
recalled from Equations (125c) and (128) that they are 
defined by the complex force coefficient,
Tik = w,2 Aik - iw. Bik	(135)
=  -p	JJni (iw. -  U0 !) <f>k ds
The determination of ½k requires solving a boundary 
value problem for <f>k and then integrating  over the 
hull surface.
  The radiation potentials, <f>k, are the solution to the 
Laplace equation subject to boundary  conditions  on 
the hull surface, on the free surface and at infinity.
The boundary condition on the hull is
        k  = 1,2,3...6	(136)
where


0/
<f>a  =  <f>a°  -	( U0 ! iw.) <f>/
where <f>k O is a potential that satisfies the 
Laplace equa­ tion in the fluid domain, the 
conditions at infinity, the free surface boundary 
conditions Equation (138) and the condition on 
the hull surface,
                  iJa<nf>/ = iw  nk	(140)
Salvesen, et al then define a complex force 
coefficient based on <f> / as
       ½/  = -piw. JJ	ni<f>/ ds	(141) The force coefficient of the added mass and damping,
½k (135), may now be simplified using the 
expressions
in (139) for <f> k in terms of <f> / and (141) for 
½/- The derivative with respect to x in (135) is 
eliminated using a variant of Stokes' theorem 
developed by Ogilvie and Tuck (1969). The 
final results in Salvesen are


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	55



              ½k  =  ½/	j, k = l, 2, 3, 4 
For j = 5, 6 and k = l, 2, 3, 4
T.5k--r,o5k --U-ora,ko
iw,
T6.k  = T6.ko + -U.-o,,,o
For j = 1, 2, 3, 4 and k = 5, 6
Tj5-  -TO j5     +-U.-oTj3o
Tj6- -To j6  --U.  oTio2
And finally for j = k = 5, 6
55-	55   + -2	.L33
a,,
T6.6 -  -   T. o	U/	o
w.



(142)



(143)




(144)




(145)


is  reduced  by  assuming  that  U0 :x is  
much  smaller
than w,. This is equivalent to assuming 
that the fre­ quency of encounter  is 
large or that the wavelength is of the 
same order of magnitude as the beam. 
This assumption is critical for it makes 
strip theory a high frequency theory; at 
low frequencies, or long wave lengths, 
a different theory results. Newman's 
(1978) unified theory is an attempt to 
combine high and low­ frequency 
theories.
  The body-boundary condition is 
simplified by noting that for a slender 
body derivatives in the longitudinal 
direction are much smaller than in the 
transverse di­ rection. The three-
dimensional unit normals into the hull 
are defined as
      1! = 7 (b(x, z)  + y)/ji/ (b(x, z) + 
y)I	(147)
where y = ± b(x, z) is the equation of 
the hull surface, and b(x, z) is the half 
beam, and ii is here the gradient 
differential operator.
For a slender body aabx< 1; aabz'
	
.
may be approximated by their two-
dimensional equiv­


  At this point in the analysis, the slender body ap­ 
proximation  and the linearization  have allowed  all the
½k to be written in terms of ½k O• Further progress 
towards  a strip theory requires that a means of eval­
uating ½/ in terms of  two-dimensional sectional prop­


alents, :




n1 z N1


=::;


1 + (!!Y




(148a)


erties be found. The first step is to note that if the 
vessel is slender, then it is consistent with the previous 
assumptions to set ds = dl dx in the surface integrals 
so that
½/ =  -  piw,f f ni<f> /  dl dx	(146)
L C,,


where the line integral in dl is around the section 
contour C,,, and the integral in dx is along the ship 
length L.
  If the integrand in Equation (146) can be written in 
terms of two-dimensional section properties, then a 
strip theory will result. The potential <f>/ satisfies the 
three-dimensional Laplace equation subject to the 
body-boundary condition, the free surface boundary


n 2  z   N2  = + 1/	1 + (!!Y (148b)
n  3 z Na=!!/	1 + (!!Y	(148c)
Note that N1  is much smaller than N2  or N3•   
Further­ more, N 1 is usually much more difficult 
to compute than  N2   or N3•   The  hull offsets  are  
normally  entered into a computer on a station-
by-station basis. Numer-
ically, the computation of :: is thus much easier than

:, but in principle N1 can be computed at the same 
time that N2  and Na are  determined.


condition and the conditions at infinity. Several as­ 
sumptions  are  used in order  to allow  nA,ko   to be re­ 
placed by its two-dimensional equivalent at each 
section. First, the slender-body approximation states 
that the derivatives in the longitudinal direction (x­ 
direction) are small relative to the derivatives in the 
transverse (y- or z-) directions. This allows the Laplace 
equation to be reduced to the two-dimensional Laplace 
equation in the y-z, or cross-flow plane. The radiation 
condition remains that there be outgoing waves at 
infinity.


OUTGOING WAVES
---	TO INFINITY
 


'v2 'Y;; = 0
lim9Y.;=O
%	- oo



 


k= 1 SURGE k=2 SWAY
k=3	HEAVE
k=4 ROLL


The free surface boundary condition, Equation (138)


Fig. 40 Two-dimensional problem for l(s.


56	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




Vertical Mode
Au=   Jau dx
A1s = J a13 dx
As1 = A1s


Table 13-Coefficients in 
Equations of Motion

A
4
4
   
=
 
J
a
4
4
  
d
x
A
.
6
 
=
	
x
 
a
2
4
 
<
i
x
 
+
 
u
 
B
2
4
C
I
I
,


Bu= f bu dx
Bia= J b1a dx
Bs1 = B,s

 

Bs1 = -  JX  ba1 dx  -   Uo,A1s
Aaa = J aaa dx
Bas= J bas dx


B22 = J b22 dx
B24 = B.2 = J b24 dx
B26 = J X b22 dx - U0 A22
B44   = Jbu dx + Be = B:.
B46 = JX  b24 dx  -   Uo A24
A62  =	X	d,x -	B22
C
I
I
,
B&2 = J X  b22 dx + U0   A22
A64  =	X  ¾  d,x -	B24
C
I
I
,
B64  = JX  b24 dx + U0  A24


Ass  = -	X ass dx - - 2 B88


A66 = JX2  a   dx + Uo: A


J
Bas = - J



X bss dx +


Uo
CII,

Uo Ass




22	22
C
I
I
,


Asa = -	X aaa dx + u: Bss
CII,
Bsa = -  JX  bss dx  -   U0   Ass




Cu::::: pg V GMT


A116 = J


X2  a88  dx + Uo: A 88
CII,


All 
integral
s are 
taken 
over 
the ship 
length.


B65 =	X2 baa dx + Uo: Baa
CII,
Caa = J Css dx  = pg JB(x) dx
Css = Csa = - J X Caa dx = - pg J X B(x) dx
c65 = pg V GML + LCF2 Caa
:::::J x2  Css dx  = pg Jx2 B(x) dx
Horizontal Mode
  

The generalized normals for k = 4, 5, 6 can 
likewise be approximated by their two-
dimensional equivalents,
n.  =  yn8 -	z
:::: N,
= (v::+ z)/	1  + (::r (149a)

 	 
(149b)
n 6 = xn2-	yn1
:::: + x N2
	(1
49c)
It was at this point in the analysis by 
Salvesen, et al (1970) that thesurge degree of 
freedom was eliminated by arguing that N1 << 
Nk, k = 2,3...6.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	57


  The approximations just described allows the poten­ 
tials 4> / and the line integrals in Equation (146) to be 
found in terms of the solutions to a series of two­ 
dimensional problems at various stations along the 
length of the ship. They consist of solving the two­ 
dimensional Laplace equation subject to a normal 
boundary condition on the body, a free-surface con­ 
dition, and conditions at infinity. As shown in Fig. 40, 
let l/Jk, k = 1, 2, 3, 4, be the solution to this two­



Table 14-Summary of Exciting Forces
F	= (F/ + FlJ\ei,,,•t
F/ is the Froude-Krylov Exciting Force amplitude F/ 
is the Diffraction Exciting Force amplitude Ff=f e-
ikxcoai,. fj(x) dx
L
j = 1, 2, 3, 4


dimensional problem. For sway, heave and roll, ifik is 
the velocity potential for a cylinder with a cross-sec­ 
tional shape equal to the ship section shape, oscillating 
on the free surface in the appropriate mode of motion.
  At a given cross section the approximation is thus 
made that
         k = 1, 2, 3, 4	(150)
It  also follows from Equation (149b,c) and the body


F/ = -f e-ikxco.,,. x.fa(x) dx
Fr/=f eikzco.,,. x/a(x) dx
L

J;(x} are the sectional Froude-Krylov exciting force ampli­
tudies


boundary condition that
<f>s° :::::: - X l/Ja
   




(151)


= pg"f;	Nj e-ikysinµ ekz dl
ex
j = 1, 2, 3, 4
F;v    =f e-ikxcos,,.  h;(x) 
dx    j = 1, 2, 3, 4


The solution  of  the l/Jk  problem  is difficult and re­	L
quires the major portion of the running time in a strip­
theory computer program. Some of the techniques for	  
solving the 1/Jk problem are mentioned in Subsection
3.5, along with the experimental determination of coef­


ficients.
The  section-wise  approximations  f pr  4>k  O



given in


F/ = + f e-ikxcosi,. (x + i°Jh 2(x)  dx


(150)	and (151) may be substituted into Equation (146)
to evaluate the line integral at each cross section. T/


hj(x)


L
are the sectional diffraction exciting force amplitudes


is then found by a simple integration along the ship 
length. However, since we first want the values of the 
coefficients aik• bik and eventually Aik and Bik• it will 
be convenient to define the following sectional added 
mass and damping coefficients:


= pf:Wo


(iNa + N1 cosµ, + N2 sinµ,) e-ikysinµ
ex
x  ek• lj,;(y, z) dl	j = 1, 2, 3, 4


w.2 a» -   iw.b» = -piw. f	l/Ji dl
Cx
j = 1, 2, 3, 4
w.2 a 13-	iw.b13   =  w.2 as1 -   iw.bs1	(152)
= - piw. f N1 l/18 dl
Cx

 
f


by recalling that w.2 Aik - iw. Bik = ½k and using the 
relations listed in Equations (142) through (152). The 
final results for  the  vertical  and  horizontal modes of a 
ship with port/ starboard symmetry are given in Table 
13. For convenience the values of C;k are also listed. All 
coefficients not given are assumed to be zero. It should be 
noted that the relations in Table 13 were derived on the 
basis of small motions. It is shown in Chapter II, for 
example, how the simple expression
for C44 breaks down at large roll angles.
  The cross-coupling coefficients between surge and 
heave and pitch shown in Table 13 are typically very 
small. The Standard Ship Motion program of the U.S.


= -piw.	N2 l/14 dl
Cx


Navy (Meyers, Applebee, Baitis, 
(1981) sets the coef­ ficients  A13 ,   Aa1,  
A15 ,   A51 ,    B1a, Ba1  ,  B15 ,    B51   equal  to 
zero, but there are indications that this 
simplification


where   are  the 2-dimensional  unit  normals and l/Ji  
are the 2-dimensional velocity potentials previously dis­ 
cussed.
The added mass and damping coefficients are found


may not always be justified.
  In Table 13 the term Be added to the B44 coefficient 
signifies the additional damping that  must  be added  to 
the strip theory result to give good predictions of


58	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



roll motion. Strip theory only predicts the inviscid wave 
damping acting on a vessel. Because roll wave gen­ 
eration is lightly damped, the other components of 
damping from viscous effects and lifting effects on the 
appendages are equally as important as the wave 
damping. In addition, the other horizontal mode coef­ 
ficients may also have to be modified for the lifting 
effects of appendages. A discussion of the roll damping 
and appendage lifting effects will be given in Subsec­ 
tion 3.8, where 4 is defined as the complete equiv­ 
alent linear damping coefficient.
  (c)	Excitation. The complex exciting force and 
moment amplitudes are found by evaluating Equations 
(125a) and (125b). To find the Froude-Krylov exciting


similar boundary value problems, it is possible through 
the use of the Green theorem and the boundary con­ 
ditions of the problem to find expressions for the dif­ 
fraction exciting forces which involve only 4>1 and 4> 
j• This interchange is known as the Baskind  relations, 
and a complete discussion may be found in Newman 
(1965).
  After eliminating <f>v by using the Haskind 
relations, the resulting expressions are reduced to 
sectional cal­ culations in a manner similar to that used 
for the Froude-Krylov exciting forces. Salvesen, et al, 
(1970), define the sectional diffraction exciting force 
ampli­ tudes as,
f


force Equation (125a) the wave potential 4> 1 is used, 
where 4>I = (ig' I (J)o) e-ik (x cos /J,+ y sinµ) ek•. Thus, the 
Froude-Krylov exciting force in the p1i direction, F/,


h,(x) = pf:(J)o


(iN 8 + N1 cosµ+ N2 sinµ)



(156)


is found as

=	+pg{f dx	f nj






(153)

dl


X  e-ikysinµ ekz l/Jly,z) dl	j = 1, 2, 3, 4
Integrating the sectional 
diffraction force along  the ship 
length results in the following 
expression for the wave 
diffraction exciting force:
F/ =f e-ikzcosµ.  hlx) dx
	
j = 1, 2, 3, 4
	
(157a)
L


e-ikzcosµ.

L	Cx


e-kysinµ. ekz


Fl=	- f e-
ikzco•µ. (x + 
io) (x) dx	(157b)


where use has been of the frequency of encounter 
relation, (J)• = (1) 0 - k U0 cosµ, and the slender-body 
approximation.
The line integral about the station in Equation (153)


F;,D = +f e-ikzcosµ. (x + iO)hi(X) d,x
L



(157c)


can be evaluated cross section by cross section. Using 
the slender-body approximations to the unit normals, 
Equations (148), (149) allow us to define the sectional 
Froude-Krylov exciting force amplitude,
f
  

A summary of the exciting forces for all six 
degrees of freedom is given in Table 14. Typical 
experimental and theoretical values are discussed 
in Section 3.5.
It  should  be noted that in the case of only pitch and
heave motions  in head seas (µ = 180 deg) the 
exciting


/j(x) = pg{   Nj e-ikysinµ. ekz dl  j = 1, 2, 3, 4	(154)
c.,


forces can be further simplified. For head seas the 
sectional diffraction force can be written as:


In this case, the Froude-Krylov exciting force ampli­ 
tudes become
F/  =f e-ikzco•µ. fj(x) dx	j = 1, 2, 3, 4	z
L


F/  = -f e-ikzcosµ.  xfa(x)dx
L
Fl=f rikzcosµ  xf2(X) dx
L



(155)












CONTROL POINT ON










Oj 2 UNKNOWN SOURCE


The computation  of  the  diffraction  exciting forces,
F/, is more difficult because the diffraction potential,


k"' SEGMENT FOR MEETING BODY BOUNDARY CONDmON


STRENGTH ONj"' SEGMENT


4> v, is unknown. However, since cf>v and <f,;satisfy very


Fig. 41 Sectional approximation for Frank's method



r8   •o.eo


MOTIO
NS  IN  
WAVES	59



 	 


Fig. 42 Lewis-form sections for vorying BIT, /3.
(Landweber and  Macagno,  l 957)





The term (iNa - N1)  can be simplified  to iNa because 
the contribution to the value of the integral  from  the 
Na term is much greater than the N1 term.  Further­ 
more the exponential term is taken outside the integral 
by replacing  ek•  with e-kr-, where T*  is a  mean draft 
for the section, usually assumed to be
T*(x) = S(x)I B(x) where
S(x) = sectional area
B(x) = waterline beam of section
Using these simplifications, (158) becomes





Finally the total heave and pitch exciting force ampli­ 
tudes are given by:


[[Caa(X) - Wo[w. aaa(X) - i baa(x)]] dx


ha(X)  = ip{ Wo  e-kT"(xl)	Na \/Ja(Y,Z) dl
Cz	(159)


FEX5 = -Ii eikx e-kT'(x)	(161)


= -I Wo e-kT'(x) [w.2 a
w.


33 (x ) -   i w, ba3   (x )]



X [ Caa(X) - w0 [w, 
aaa(X) - i b3a (X)] ]


where the line integral around the section has been 
replaced by its equivalent value given by Equation 
(152).


- !fo w0
iw.


[w. a 33


(x ) - ibaa(X)] dx


  Using the same assumptions, the sectional Froude­ 
Krylov exciting force becomes
I


Equations (161) allow the heave and pitch exciting
forces to be computed in terms of the sectional ge­ 
ometry and the sectional added mass and damping.


la(x)  = pg{ e-kT'(x)	Na dl
Cz



(160)
  

3.5	Computation of a Two-
Dimensional Case. The key to 
a successful strip-theory 
computer program for ship 
motions is to have a good 
method to solve the


= pg{ e-kT"(x) B(x) = I e-kT"(x) Caa(X)


two-dimensional problem shown in 
Fig. 40. Mathe-


60	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

matically the problem so defined is called a mixed	segments. Over each segment fluid sources with con- 
boundary  value problem  and there  are many methods	stant,  but  unknown,  strengths  are  distributed.  The 
for  its  solution.  In  ship hydrodynamics  the two most	form of the unit source potential is chosen so that the 
popular methods  for solving the problem are boundary	boundary conditions on the free surface and at infinity 
integral  methods  (Frank,  1967),(Yeung, 1982)and the	are met. The unknown source strengths are found by 
multipole method (Ursell, 1949),(Porter, 1960),or (De satisfying the body boundary conditions at  the  center 
Jong, 1973). The multipole method is often simplified point of each segment. Knowing the  source  strength, 
using  Lewis-forms   (Lewis,  1929). In this  subsection	the velocity potential, \fIk, can be found, and hence the 
the  two  methods  will  be  briefly  discussed and  then	sectional added mass and damping coefficients can be 
results   for  some  standard   shapes  will be given. The	determined by integrating around the section, as given 
mathematical   details  of  each  of  the  methods can be	in Equation (152).
found  in the appropriate  references.	The advantages of Frank's method are that it is
  Many different boundary integral techniques have  computationally fast  and any ship cross-section can be  
been proposed to solve the two-dimensional problem. approximated with as much accuracy as desirable. Typ- 
Potash (1971) solves for the potential directly.  Chang  ically, 8 to  10 segments  on a half·section  are  enough 
and Pien (1975,1976)use a dipole distribution. Troesch to get accurate added mass and damping coefficients 
(1979) and Frank (1967) use source distributions. It for motions in the  vertical  plane.  Slightly  more  seg- 
should be noted that the  boundary  integral  methods  ments  seem to be needed for  the  transverse  motions, 
used to solve the sectional problem are two-dimen- particularly for roll.
sional  analogs   of  the  three-dimensional  methods  of			The primary disadvantage of Frank's method is the 
Faltinsen  and  Michelsen  (1976), Chang (1977), Inglis		presence of irregular frequencies. In fact, most of the 
and  Price  (1981),etc., to be discussed  in the next sub-		boundary integral methods are plagued by irregular 
section.		frequencies when the cross-section is surface-piercing. 
The method of Frank  (1967)appears  to be preferred	This was first pointed out by John (1950)in the context in 
many,  if not  most, ship motion computer programs.		of using  source  distributions  to solve  free-surface 
As shown in Fig. 41, Frank's method consists of di- problems. The irregular frequencies  fully discussed by 
viding  the  ship  section  into  a  series of straight-line		Ohmatsu (1975) are a set of discrete frequencies at








MOTIONS IN  WAVES	61

which the solution obtained from the boundary integral 
method is not unique or "blows up." The problem is 
associated with the resonant frequencies at which the 
interior flow in the "closed basin" inside the hull sec­ 
tion breaks down.
  Frank (1967) shows that for a rectangular cross sec­ 
tion the irregular frequencies occur at
w,.2  = n 7coth (mr   Tl B)	n  = 1,2,3,...	(162)
where
w.. = n th irregular frequency
B = beam of rectangle
T  = draft  of rectangle
The lowest value of the irregular frequency occurs for 
n = 1. Equation (162) shows that for fixed draft, the 
first irregular frequency decreases as the beam in­ 
creases. For normal ship types the irregular frequen­ 
cies are often above the range of practical interest. 
However, for certain section types, such as transom 
sterns or offshore transport barges, the irregular fre­ 
quencies can cause calculation difficulties.
  The irregular frequencies can be circumvented by 
various means. Ohmatsu (1975) suggested extending


the source distribution along the free surface interior 
to the cross-section to put a "lid" on the body. Ogilvie 
and Shin (1978), Sayer and Ursell (1977), and Borresen 
(1980) all place concentrated sources or o_ther singu­ 
larities at the origin, with strength and phase selected 
so that the energy associated with a possible sloshing 
mode is absorbed by the concentrated singularity. Nu­ 
merically, the proposed methods do not always seem 
to work, particularly in the transverse modes. Re­ 
search is continuing, and a satisfactory method for 
removing the irregular frequencies should be available 
soon.
The multipole method was first developed by Ursell
(1949).  His method  consists  of the superposition of


Fig. 44 Sectional added mass and damping coefficients in heaving (rectangle)


potential functions that all satisfy the Laplace equa­ 
tion, the free-surface boundary condition, and the con­ 
dition at infinity. The potential functions represent a 
source and horizontal dipole at the origin, which give 
the radiated waves at infinity, and a series of multipole 
potentials that die off rapidly as one moves away from 
the origin. The strengths of the source, dipole and 
multipoles are all determined so that the body bound­ 
ary condition is met. Ursell (1949) used the source and 
symmetric multipoles to solve the problem of a heaving 
circular cylinder. The dipole and asymmetric multi­ 
poles are used for sway and roll. The number of terms 
used in the multipole expansion are determined by the 
number of points on the body surface at which the 
body boundary condition is met.
  For sections that are not circular in shape conformal 
mapping is used. Conformal mapping is a mathemat­ 
ical procedure in which one shape is mapped into an-


0   D	02' 5	0.50	O.'IS	1.25	150	1.75	200
-·'/!

 
Fig. 45 Sectional added mass and damping coefficients in swaying 
(rectangle), (Vughts, 1968)


62	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

 


0.1:ZS  ---...---...---...----,----r-:;  .-.,•:.--....,...--,
0	0.10


-•H1 i
















Fig.  46   Sectional  added  mass  moment  of  inertia  and  damping  coefficient 
in roll (rectangle)


-·'/1i
Fig. 47 Sectional coupling coefficients of sway into roll (rectangle)



other  shape   through   a   change   in variabies.  The	based on the sectional beam-to-draft ratio, B(x)I T(x),


mathematical function that transforms the coordinates 
of the cross section into the coordinates of a different


and  the  secti.onal  area  coeffic.ient (  /3-n = T(Sx)(Bx)(x)) ·


cross section is called the mapping function. In the 
multipole method, the mapping function that trans­ 
forms the ship section into a semicircle is found. The 
mapping function can then be used in conjunction with 
Ursell's known solution for a circular cylinder to find 
the solution for the actual ship section. The difficulty 
in the technique is to determine the proper mapping 
function for each cross section. Various methods have 
been proposed to find the mapping function. De Jong 
(1973) gives a general description of the problem for 
both vertical and horizontal modes of motion. Von Ker­ 
zech and Tuck (1969) and Bishop, Price and Tam (1978) 
use different mathematical techniques to find the map­ 
ping functions. Bishop, et al (1980) give the added mass 
and damping for various sections in heave. Porter 
(1960) considered an arbitrarily-shaped cross section


Fig. 42 shows the sectional shapes for varius 
combi­ nations of beam-to-draft ratio and sectional 
area coef­ ficient. Fig. 43 (Frank and Salvesen, 
1970) shows how well Lewis-forms approximate 
the stations of a Mar­ iner-type hull. Note that 
most of the stations are fairly well approximated. 
The bottom is not exactly flat, but this makes little 
difference in the added mass and damping. The 
bulb sections near the bow and the wine­ glass 
sections near the stern are not well approxi­ mated, 
however.
  Lewis-forms cannot fit all ship sections. For any 
given half-beam-to-draft ratio, BI 2T, there is a 
per­ missible range for the sectional area 
coefficient. Land­ weber and Macagno (1957) 
derive the permissible range as


in heave and included experimental results. Bermijo 
(1965) developed a technique to find the mapping func­ 
tion coefficients for use in Porter's method. Specific


3?T ( 2	B)	3?T (B	12)	B



 
(163)


mapping functions to give certain forms are discussed


3?T( 2	2T)	3?T ( 12	21"\	B	1


by Lewis (1929), Tasai (1959), Demanche (1968), and
Landweber and Macagno (1957, 1959).


32   -	1i	/3n  128	+ 1i J 2T


  The most common mapping uses the so-called Lewis­ 
forms (Lewis, 1929), (Landweber and Macagno, 1957). 
Lewis-forms use a two-parameter mapping function


where



/3n is the sectional area coefficient.


 




 


  For ship sections outside of the range shown in 
Equation (163)modifications must be made. Some ship 
motion programs artificially modify the sectional area 
and / or the half-beam to draft ratio  until  it  fits  into 
the range. For  strip-theory  calculations this  approach 
is not too bad because the final computed motions are 
hardly affected. Another approach is to alter the map- 
ping function slightly to give a different section shape 
for the same two parameters. Thus, Demanche (1968) 
uses the half-beam-to-draft ratio and sectional area 
coefficient as the two mapping parameters but obtains 
bulbous-bow type sections. The combination of Lewis- 
forms and Demanche bulb forms seems to cover most 
ship sections.
  Summarizing, Frank's method and Lewis-forms are 
the two most common approaches to computing the 
two-dimensional coefficients for use in strip theory. 
Frank's method allows a more accurate description of 
the hull cross section, but it is troubled by irregular 
frequencies and requires more computer time. The 
Lewis-form approach does not have irregular frequen- 
cies, but it cannot accurately handle bulbous-bow sec- 
tions, wine-glassed shaped sterns and barge sections 
with high B / T ratios. Lewis-forms are useful in pre- 
liminary design because only the load waterline beam, 
draft and sectional area need be known. These are the 
design parameters that are available early in the de-


sign stage. Late in the  design  stage,  when  a full  set 
of hull offsets is known, the use of a boundary 
integral method (Frank's method) or a multiparameter 
confor- mal mapping is probably justified.
  A new "hybrid" method to solve the two-
dimensional problem has recently been developed by 
Yeung (1975) and Nestegard and Sclavounos (1983). 
The hybrid method uses a boundary integral technique 
in a region close to the body and a multipole 
expansion far  from the body. The method eliminates 
the irregular fre- quencies but appears to use more 
computer time than Frank's method. Research on the 
hybrid method is continuing.
  Several investigations have been carried out to 
com- pare the two-dimensional theoretical predictions 
of sec- tional coefficients with experimental results. 
Porter (1960) and Paulling and Richardson (1962) 
measured the vertical force and pressure at several 
locations for heaving sections. Vughts (1968) 
considered heave, sway, roll and sway-roll cross-
coupling for five differ- ent section shapes (circle, 
rectangle, triangle and two ship-like sections). The 
results for the rectangle are shown in Figs. 44 through 
48.
  Fig. 44 shows the results for a heaving rectangle at 
various beam-to-draft ratios. The individual points 
are the experimental results; the solid curve is from 
con- formal mapping; and the dashed curve is for the 
equiv- alent Lewis form. As can be seen,  the  
experimental and theoretical results agree  fairly  
well. The fall  off  in the heave-added-mass at low 
frequency is due to experimental inaccuracies and 
should be disregarded. The linearity of the results is 
verified by the fact  that the experimental points for 
heave amplitudes of 0.01,
0.02	and 0.03 meters (0.38-1.1 in.) all fall along the 
same curve.
  The curves in Fig. 44 clearly illustrate that added 
mass and damping in heave are greatly  increased  as 
the B/Tratio increases. This is to be expected in heave 
motion since, for a body of constant cross-sectional 
area, a wide, flat section will produce more of a fluid 
disturbance (hence larger  hydrodynamic  forces)  
than a narrow, deep section.
  The solid and dashed curves demonstrate the differ- 
ences in predicted added mass and damping using the 
Lewis-form approximation versus the more accurate 
multi-parameter	conformal mapping. The results 
shown are for a rectangle, but the differences are typ- 
ical for normal ship-like sections. Bishop, et al (1978) 
show that the differences between using Lewis-forms 
and multiparameter conformal mapping can be sub- 
stantial for bow and stern sections. For normal ships, 
the predicted motions using Lewis-forms or more 
exact techniques usually do not differ very much. 
However, other quantities such as hydrodynamic 
pressure, shear or bending movements may be greatly 
affected.
  The significant effects of oscillation frequency  on 
the added mass and damping are apparent from Fig.
44. At high frequency the added mass approaches a 
constant  and the damping tends to approach zero. This


64	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

is the  result   of  the  presence  of  the  free surface.  At		ences are also the result of viscous effects. The non- 
high  frequencies  the  free  surface  is dominated by in-	linearities associated with roll are very important in 
ertial  effects  and  consequently  normal gravity  waves	ship motion theory and are discussed in Subsection 3.8. 
are  not  generated.  The  damping,  which results  from			The added mass and damping of the various ship 
energy   carried   away  from  the  body  by the  gravity	sections are usually computed by subroutines in a ship 
waves,  tends  to  zero.  The  added  mass approaches  a	motion  program.	Several   authors	have published 
value  that  is  independent  of  frequency  and equal to	curves of added mass and damping versus frequency 
half  the  added  mass  of the  equivalent double body in	for various section shapes  (Porter,  1960), (Jacobs,  et 
an  infinite  fluid. At  low frequencies  the free surface	aI1960), (Frank, 1967),and (Bishop, et a11978b, 1980). 
is  dominated  by  gravity  effects  and  acts  like a rigid	Papanikolaou (1980) computed the added mass and 
wall. The  wave  damping  again  approaches zero. The	damping in heave, sway and roll using a boundary 
added mass  coefficient,ass, tends toward infinity. How-	integral method for triangles, ellipses and rectangles 
ever, this  does not mean the hydrodynamic force tends	of widely varying BIT ratios. Such curves are useful 
toward  infinity since a33   must  be multiplied by  - (1)2  to	for visualizing the effects of frequency; to obtain val- 
obtain  the  force. The variation  of the  added mass and	ues of added mass and damping for specific sections; 
damping with frequency,  which is an important aspect	and to obtain numbers  to  check computer  programs. of  
ship-motion theory,  is the  result  of the presence of			3.6 Other Technique. to Compute the  Hydrodynamic the  
free  surface  and the  generation  of gravity waves	Force••	Strip theory is probably the most widely used 
by  the  body  motion. The frequency  dependence is re-	method to compute the hydrodynamic forces acting on 
sponsible  for  the  memory  effects  in the time domain	a vessel in regular waves. However, under  some cir- 
and  is  the  primary   reason   the   solution  of the  ship	cumstances (for example, high forward speed or non- 
motion problem  is different  from  a multiple degree of	conventional vessels) it does not necessarily give ac- 
freedom vibration problem.	curate answers. Many different techniques have been
  The experimentally measured damping coefficients or are being developed to predict analytically the  hy- 
shown in Fig. 44 are higher than the solid lines because  drodynamic forces  on a  vessel  in waves.  In  this  sub- 
of viscous effects which tend to increase the damping section several  of the  other  techniques  will be briefly 
over the ideal fluid wave damping. For heave and sway described and  appropriate  references  given, but  a de- 
the viscous damping is only a small percentage of the tailed  description  of  all  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this 
total damping. Depending on the section shape, the chapter. Newman (1978) gives  a history  of the  devel- 
viscous damping in roll can be the major component opment of ship motion theory.
of  the total  damping..			As previously mentioned, strip theory is a high-fre- 
The  sectional  coefficients of added mass and damp-	quency theory in that the frequency  of encounter  is ing  
in  sway  are  shown  in  Fig.  45. As expected, the		assumed large. It is also possible to develop the so- 
effects  of BIT   are  the  opposite of heave  in that  BIT		called ordinary slender-body theory of ship motions
= 2 has  the  larger  hydrodynamic force. The effects of	by  assuming  the  frequency   to  be  low. Newman and
frequency are similar to heave except that  the  sway  Tuck  (1964) and  Maruo  (1967) assumed  the  wave-  
added mass approaches one-half of the double-body- length of the incident waves to be the same order of in-an-
infinite-fluid value at zero frequency instead of magnitude as the ship's length.  This leads to a theory infinite 
frequency. Mathematically, this change  in be-  in  which  the  hydrostatic  restoring  forces  and  the havior 
between heave and sway is a result of the free- Froude-Krylov exciting forces are the dominant terms, surface 
boundary condition and  the  required  image  with  the  result  that  the  leading-order  equations  of system at 
high and low frequencies. A complete ex- motion are nonresonant. For zero  forward  speed  in planation may be 
found in Newman (1977); Section head seas ordinary slender-body theory gives reason-
6.17. Again the  viscous damping tends to increase the	able predictions, but the comparisons with experiment 
experimentally  measured  damping coefficients.	degrade as the speed and frequency increase.
  Figs.  46, 47, and 48 show the added mass and damp-		Newman (1978),Newman and Sclavounos (1980)and 
ing  in  roll  and  the  cross-coupling between sway and	Sclavounos (1985) have developed a unified theory to 
roll  for  BIT  =  2. The  results   for  other BIT   ratios	link ordinary slender-body theory and strip theory. At 
are   similar.  Fig.  46  clearly  shows the  nonlinearities	low frequencies, the unified theory approaches the or- 
associated   with  viscous  effects  in  roll,  because  for	dinary slender-body theory and yields terms that in- 
three   different  roll  amplitudes  very  different  added	volve longitudinal interference between sections. For 
mass   and   damping   result.   The theoretical  results,	high frequencies the longitudinal interferences dis- 
which  are  linear,  predict  that  the  coefficients are  in-	appear and the results are identical to the strip theory 
dependent  of  roll amplitude.  The cross-coupling coef-	derived in the previous section. At zero forward speed 
ficients  also  show  nonlinear  effects, for theoretically	the results of unified theory are similar  to  the  inter- 
the sway-into-roll and roll-into-sway coefficientsshould	polation solution  of Maruo (1970).Sclavounos (1985) 
be  identical.  But  the  experiments  indicate that  they	presents predictions using unified theory for the heave 
are  similar  but  not  identical.  Presumably  the  differ-	and pitch motions of a Series 60 (CB = 0.70) and a


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	65

destroyer  model in head seas.  For zero forward speed,		mensional seakeeping problems. For example, the use 
the  added  mass  and  damping  coefficients have been		of numerical methods in free-surface flows is a grow- 
computed   by  Mays  (1978) and   Maruo  and  Tokura		ing field of research, much too large to discuss in this 
(1978). Good agreement   is found  with exact three-di-		section (Yeung, 1982). However, it should be pointed 
mensional  computations and experiments.		out that offshore engineers routinely solve the linear, 
The typical strip  theory  (as presented  in the preced-	three-dimensional, zero-speed problem for a vessel in ing 
sub-section) uses  the  Haskind relations to compute		sinusoidal waves using source-panel methods. In off-
the  exciting  forces.  This eliminates  the  need to com-		shore engineering the geometry of many of the vessels 
pute  the  diffraction potential, but it has also eliminated	precludes the use of strip theory and the use of more 
any  information   about  the  variation   of the  exciting	involved theories has been necessary. Faltinsen and 
forces   and   diffracted  waves   along  the ship  length,	Michelsen (1975) and Garrison (1974, 1975, 1978) are 
quantities  that  are  needed  to compute relative motion	examples of these calculations. Chang (1977)and Inglis 
and wave-induced bending  moments.  Ad hoc methods	and Price (1979, 1981) have extended the method to 
have  been  developed that  enable  strip  theory to com-	include forward speed. Liapis and Beck  (1985) and 
pute  these  quantities,  but  they  are  not entirely satis-	King et al (1988) have solved the problem directly in 
factory.   For  these  reasons  several  researchers  have	the time domain. For problems with forward speed the 
investigated  the  direct  solution of the wave diffraction	time-domain solution appears to require less compu- 
problem.   Ogilvie   (1977)  reviewed   the  various   ap-	tational effort than the equivalent frequency-domain 
proaches using slender-body theory. Troesch (1979) solution. Comparisons with available experimental 
considered  the  problem  in  non-head  seas.  Faltinsen	data indicate that in general the three-dimensional nu- 
(1971) developed a theory  for ships  in high-frequency	merical methods give better agreement than strip the- 
head  seas.  Faltinsen's  results  are  dominated by a sin-	ory. The computation times for the three-dimensional 
gularity in the bow region. Maruo and Sasaki (1974) methods are significantly larger than strip theory but 
modified Faltinsen's   approach  in order  to remove the	this will become less significant with faster computers 
singularity.  Beck and Troesch  (1980) used the Maruo	and improved computer codes. Further research is still 
and  Sasaki  theory  to  compute  the pressure  distribu-	necessary to define the trade-offs among the various 
tion,  exciting  forces  and  wave  amplitude  due to the	numerical methods.
incident plus diffracted wave system. Reasonable  The  next  step  in  the  evolution  of  pure  numerical 
agreement was found with· experiments. Liapis and calculations appears to be the inclusion of nonlinear- 
Faltinsen (1980) extended the Maruo and Sasaki ap- ities in both the body-boundary condition and the free- 
proach  to non-head seas.	surface boundary condition. The eventual goal would
  The  unified  theory   for   wave  diffraction has  been	be to include viscous effects as well. 
developed  by  Sclavounos  (1984). For  high-frequency		3.7 Longitudinal Motion •.
oblique  waves  this  unified theory  yields the same re-			(a)  General.	In this subsection the characteristics 
suIts  as  Troesch  (1979). For  head  waves the  Maruo		of the longitudinal or vertical-plane motions (surge, 
and  Sasaki  (1974)theory is recovered.		heave and pitch) will be discussed; the next subsection 
Recently,  several  researchers   have proposed a new	will analyze the transverse or horizontal-plane mo- 
approach  to  the  ship  motion  problem.  The works of		tions. As previously mentioned (in Section 3.2, Simpli- 
Chapman  (1975), Faltinsen   (1983), Loeser, Yue, and		fied Head Sea Case) the separation of the response of 
Salvesen  (1982), and Yeung  and  Kim (1984) all have		the ship into vertical and horizontal-plane motions is
similar  formulations.  In principle the  approach can be	the result of linear theory and the fact that for a port/ 
used to solve the  nonlinear  ship-motion problem, but	starboard  symmetric  ship there  is  no cross-coupling  
to  date  numerical  results   are  only  available for  the	between them. If nonlinear motion or a ship with asym- 
linear  case.  The approach  consists  of solving a series	metry (for example due  to  mooring lines) is investi-  
of  two-dimensional initial-value problems  in a control	gated, all six degrees of freedom must be considered 
plane  fixed in  space  through   which  the ship passes.	simultaneously.
The shape of the cross section of the hull in the control The number of published investigations  into the  ex-  
plane is continuously changing due to the ship motions perimental and/  or theoretical  aspects  of ship motions 
and forward speed. The conditions on the free  surface  in regular  waves  is immense  (see the  Proceedings  of 
are stepped forward in time using the free-surface the ITTC and ATTC seakeeping committees). There is 
boundary condition. Consequently, as opposed to strip space available here for only a few examples to illus- 
theory, the forward speed effects are brought into both  trate  various  aspects  of ship pitching, heaving and (to 
the hull and free-surface boundary conditions. Nu- a  limited  extent)  surging  motions  in  regular  waves. 
merical calculations for the added mass and damping The coefficients in the equations  of motion will be dis- 
show improved agreement with experiments and three- cussed first; followed by samples of computed ship 
dimensional calculations.	motions.
  The  advent  of  large,  high-speed  computers has al-		(b)  Coefficients   in   the   equation of  motion.	To 
lowed the  direct  numerical  solution  of some three-di-	measure the distribution of the hydrodynamic forces


66	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



















0


5

4
N	3
N
•	....,.... 
2
i:,	I

0


5

4

3

2


































































         D
ATA 
POINT
S 
(EXPE
RIMEN
T I




































































(EXPE
RIMEN
T)


f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
i
e
s
.
 
A
s
 
e
x
p
e
c
t
e
d
,
 
t
h
e
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
m
a
s
s
  
i
s
  
l
a
r
g
e
s
t
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
w
i
d
e
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
r
o
u
n
d
 
m
i
d
s
h
i
p
 
a
n
d
 
d
e
c
r
e
a
s
e
s
 
t
o
 
z
e
r
o
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
e
n
d
s
.
 
F
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
l
o
w
e
s
t
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
,
 
t
h
e
 
d
i
s
­
 
a
g
r
e
e
m
e
n
t
 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
 
t
h
e
 
t
h
e
o
r
e
t
i
c
a
l
 
a
n
d
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
c
u
r
v
e
s
 
s
h
o
w
s
 
t
h
e
 
a
p
p
r
e
c
i
a
b
l
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
r
e
e
-
d
i
m
e
n
­
 
s
i
o
n
a
l
i
t
y
 
a
n
d
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
 
s
p
e
e
d
.
 
F
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
h
i
g
h
e
r
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
­
 
c
i
e
s
 
t
h
e
 
a
g
r
e
e
m
e
n
t
 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
 
t
h
e
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
s
 
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
 
t
w
o
-
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
l
 
s
t
r
i
p
 
t
h
e
o
r
y
 
a
p
p
r
o
x
i
m
a
t
i
o
n
 
i
s
 
r
e
a
s
o
n
­
 
a
b
l
y
 
g
o
o
d
 
a
t
 
z
e
r
o
 
s
p
e
e
d
,
 
b
u
t
 
i
t
 
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
a
g
r
e
e
­
 
m
e
n
t
 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
 
t
h
e
o
r
y
 
a
n
d
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
 
b
e
c
o
m
e
s
 
d
i
v
e
r
g
e
n
t
 
a
s
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
 
s
p
e
e
d
 
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
s
.
 
O
t
h
e
r
 
c
o
e
f
­
 
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
 
s
h
o
w
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
m
e
 
t
y
p
e
 
o
f
 
c
o
r
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
.
  T
h
e
 
s
p
e
e
d
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
a
r
e
 
m
o
r
e
 
c
l
e
a
r
l
y
 
s
e
e
n
 
b
y
 
e
x
a
m
i
n
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
t
o
t
a
l
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
m
a
s
s
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
 
i
n
 
h
e
a
v
e
,
 
A
s
s
·
 
F
i
g
.
 
5
0
 
i
s
 
t
a
k
e
n
 
f
r
o
m
 
F
a
l
t
i
n
s
e
n
 
(
1
9
7
4
)
 
b
u
t
 
i
s
 
b
a
s
e
d
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
w
o
r
k
 
o
f
 
G
e
r
r
i
t
s
m
a
 
a
n
d
 
B
e
u
k
e
l
m
a
n
.
 
T
h
e
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
m
a
s
s
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
­
 
c
i
e
n
t
 
w
a
s
 
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
d
 
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
r
m
u
l
a
 
g
i
v
e
n
 
i
n
 
T
a
b
l
e
 
1
3
,
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
m
a
s
s
 
d
e
t
e
r
m
i
n
e
d
 
b
y
 
u
s
i
n
g
 
L
e
w
i
s
-
f
o
r
m
 
a
p
p
r
o
x
i
m
a
t
i
o
n
s
.
 
A
s
 
c
a
n
 
b
e
 
s
e
e
n
,
 
t
h
e
 
e
x
­
 
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
a
r
e
 
r
e
a
s
o
n
a
b
l
y
 
p
r
e
d
i
c
t
e
d
 
b
y
 
s
t
r
i
p
t
h
e
o
r
y
.
 
T
h
e
 
d
e
e
p
 
d
i
p
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
 
f
o
r
 
F
n
 
 
=
 
0
.
1
5
 
a
r
o
u
n
d
	
=
 
2
 
i
s
 
p
r
o
b
a
b
l
y
 
d
u
e
 
t
o
 
t
a
n
k
 
w
a
l
l
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
a
n
d
 
d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
 
 
t
h
e
 
a
c
t
u
a
l
 
 
v
a
l
u
e
s
 
f
o
r
 
a
 
s
h
i
p
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
o
p
e
n
 
o
c
e
a
n
.
 
T
h
e
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
-
s
p
e
e
d
 
d
e
­
 
p
e
n
d
e
n
c
e
 
i
s
 
c
l
e
a
r
l
y
 
v
i
s
i
b
l
e
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
.
 
T
h
e
 
s
t
r
i
p
-
t
h
e
o
r
y
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
h
a
v
e
 
n
o
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
-
s
p
e
e
d
 
d
e
­
 
p
e
n
d
e
n
c
e
 
f
o
r
 
a
 
g
i
v
e
n
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
 
o
f
 
e
n
c
o
u
n
t
e
r
.
 
T
h
e
 
f
o
r
­
 
w
a
r
d
-
s
p
e
e
d
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
t
e
n
d
 
t
o
 
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
 
a
t
 
l
o
w
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
i
e
s
o
f
 
e
n
c
o
u
n
t
e
r
 
(
i
.
e
.
 
l
o
n
g
 
w
a
v
e
l
e
n
g
t
h
s
)
.
 
A
s
 
w
e
 
s
h
a
l
l
 
s
e
e
,
 
i
m
p
r
o
p
e
r
 
a
c
c
o
u
n
t
i
n
g
 
f
o
r
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
-
s
p
e
e
d
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
i
n
 
s
t
r
i
p
 
t
h
e
o
r
y
 
w
i
l
l
 
c
a
r
r
y
 
r
i
g
h
t
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
 
a
n
d
 
d
e
­
 
r
i
v
e
d
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
 
p
r
e
d
i
c
t
i
o
n
s
.
 
O
n
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
g
o
a
l
s
 
o
f
 
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
­
 
d
a
y
 
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
 
i
n
t
o
 
s
h
i
p
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
 
t
h
e
o
r
y
 
i
s
 
t
o
 
i
m
p
r
o
v
e
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
e
d
i
c
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
-
s
p
e
e
d
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
.
  T
h
e
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
t
e
 
s
e
t
 
o
f
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
 
h
a
v
e
 
b
e
e
n
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
­
 
m
e
n
t
a
l
l
y
 
d
e
t
e
r
m
i
n
e
d
 
b
y
 
G
e
r
r
i
t
s
m
a
 
(
1
9
6
0
)
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
r
e
e
 
S
e
­
 
r
i
e
s
 
6
0
 
p
a
r
e
n
t
 
f
o
r
m
s
 
o
f
 
b
l
o
c
k
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
 
C
B
 
=
 
0
.
6
0
,
 
0
.
7
0
,
 
0
.
8
0
.
 
M
o
d
e
l
s
 
w
e
r
e
 
o
s
c
i
l
l
a
t
e
d
 
a
t
 
v
a
r
i
o
u
s
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
­
 
c
i
e
s
 
w
h
i
l
e
 
a
t
 
c
o
n
s
t
a
n
t
 
s
p
e
e
d
 
i
n
 
c
a
l
m
 
w
a
t
e
r
.
 
F
i
g
.
 
5
1
 
s
h
o
w
s
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
 
A
3
3
 
,
 
B
s
s
,
 
A
s
s
 
a
n
d
 
B
s
s
 
a
s
 
a
 
f
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
 
a
n
d
 
b
l
o
c
k
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
 
f
o
r
 
f
o
u
r
 
F
r
o
u
d
e
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
s
.
 
T
h
e
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
m
a
s
s
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
 
a
r
e
 
p
l
o
t
t
e
d
 
a
s


-••- Fn=O
---	( THEORY)
Fn •0


-•-	Fn=0,15
(EXPERIMENT)
----- Fn •0.30


the 
nondimensional 
coefficients:
A  
,    
_ 
A
ss
a  
d	A,	_ Ass



(164)


Fig. 49 Comparison of sectional values of added mass, a 33 , from two­


33-T  n	ss-u2


dimensional theory (Fn = 0) and from experiment (Fn = 0, 0.15 and 0.30) 
(Gerritsma and Beukelman, 1967)


where !:,,. is ship mass, WI g, and L is 
length.
The damping coefficients are 
nondimensionalized as



along the length of a ship, Gerritsma and Beukelman 
(1964, 1965, 1967) and Gerritsma (1966) have tested a


,	- Bss.Jil
33 -	t:,.


and	B' ss --


Bts:,s.£.2Jil	(165)


segmented model of a Series 60, CB= 0.70 ship. The 
added mass and damping terms were measured by 
forced oscillation testing at constant speeds in calm 
water. The exciting forces were determined  by towing 
a fixed model in waves. Fig. 49 shows the distribution 
of the heave added mass along the length of the model 
at three different forward speeds and three oscillation
  

Fig. 51 clearly illustrates the effect of body 
shape, the fuller form normally having  larger  
added  mass and less damping relative to its 
displacement. While not as obvious as in Fig. 
50, the forward-speed effects are still present. 
The figure also indicates how the damping 
coefficient tends to zero at high and low fre­ 
quencies.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	67
  The changes in the hydrostatic (restoring) coeffi­ 
cients with forward speed are shown in Fig. 52, which 
is also taken from Gerritsma (1960). The values are 
nondimensionalized with respect to the zero-speed val­ 
ues so that:


C,	Caa	d  C'   _	Css


(166)


aa = -(C) an	s-s -(C)


where
C


33ST	55ST


33 , C55 are the actual values of hydrostatic coeffi­ 
cients measured at forward speed, and
(Cs3) s T ( C55 )s T are the values of hydrostatic coefficients 
computed at zero forward speed (see Ta­ 
ble 13).
  As can be seen, the pitch hydrostatic coefficient can 
vary appreciably with forward speed. C55 is probably 
more affected by forward speed than C33 because of 
the bow and stern wave systems. At the present time 
all ship motion programs assume Cik to be speed in­ 
dependent. This could be one of the reasons that pitch 
predictions tend to become less accurate as forward 
speed increases.
  The form of the cross-coupling coefficients, A35 and 
A53 , is illustrated in Fig. 53 (Faltinsen, 1974).9 Equa­ 
tions listed in Table 13 show that for nearly fore-and­ 
aft  symmetric  ships,  the  sign  and  magnitude  of  A 35
and A53 are dominated by the forward-speed terms. At


high frequency B33 tends toward zero so that  A35  and 
A5a approach zero. The chain-dotted and dashed curves 
show the differences in computing Aas and A53 from 
Lewis-forms versus the Frank method.  For  normal 
ship sections the difference is expected to be small. 
Also shown on the graph are the results computed 
according to Ogilvie and Tuck (1969). The Ogilvie-Tuck 
coefficients contain integral terms which are extremely 
difficult to compute. However, Faltinsen's (1974) re­ 
sults show that for this particular ship the  Ogilvie­ 
Tuck coefficients give better agreement with experi­ 
ments. Whether or not this conclusion holds in general 
is not known. At the present time research is contin­ 
uing into improving the prediction of all the coefficients 
of the equations of motion.
  (c) Exciting forces. Typical exciting force ampli­ 
tudes in head seas for heave and pitch are shown in  
Fig. 54, which is taken from Gerritsma and Beukelman 
(1967). The non-dimensional force and moment coeffi­ 
cients are defined as
Fi=	F-a






Fig. 50 Added-mass coefficient, A33 (nondimensionalized by p7 = ) for
Series 60, C, = 0.70 (Faltinsen, 197-4)
where
Aw is the waterplane area
h is the longitudinal moment of inertia of
_	water-plane area about y axis
t is the wave amplitude and k is the wave num- ber
Gerritsma and Beukelman used the same segmented model 
for the experiments that was used to obtain the results 
reproduced in Fig. 49. As can be seen, the whole-model 
results and the sum of the sections show good agreement.
The pitch exciting force (moment) is non-dimension­


pgAwt
F; =	Fs _
pghkt

 


(167)


alized relative to the maximum wave 
slope, kt. This means that while the 
nondimensional exciting force 
amplitude goes to 1.0 at low 
frequency, the dimen­
sional pitch exciting force amplitude, 
IFsl, goes to zero. It is a maximum 
around L/Lw = 0.75. Note that the 
amplitudes of both Fa and F5  change 
significantly with


  •	The signs of the forward-speed term have been reversed from 
those in Table 13 because Faltinsen assumes positive x out of the 
stern.


incident wavelength. As previously noted, the change of 
exciting force with wavelength is very important and 
has a strong influence on the resulting ship mo-


0,
01)




1.0_	4	_0.20

0.04

("



10	4
A.',,


05	3


0.15	0.5	HEAVE	3


A J	002	Fn• 0.25



0	2	0	0.10	0	_2
a;,	e,,
B s
0.05

 
0	0




,,
lzlCI
0
..-


0

I.	4	0.20	1.0	4	_Q,20
0.04


m
Cl>
0
'Tl
z
<




0.5


0
.
0
4
	
►
.
.
-
(A 
t 		(A;,t	►



A;J


0.02


0.15

 


0.
5
A ,
 


lnlCI
:I:
=mi
 
                      
q


0	2	0	.10	0
a;s	655	s;1	Ss,
0.05	0.05


C
mllCI







0	2	4


0
	
0
 
0
	
2
	
6


Wi/Cio'


w/Li;

 


wv'Ci

 


0	2	UJ.4,'['iij


I	I I I I I I


I	 	I	I        I    I        I        
I        I        I  I        I	I


I	I I I I

 	       


I       I   I      I	I

 
	
 


0	5	10	15	0	5	10	15
W  FOR 8 1  MODEL	W FOR 8' MODEL


0	fu FOR 8'	10	15	0	10	15


Fig. 51 Nondimensional heave and pitch coefficients for Series 60 forms at Fn = 0.15-0.30 (Gerritsma, 1960)


MOTIONS IN WAVES	69



70
















































ments with model tests and theoretical calculations. 
Fig. 55 shows the results of runs at three speeds  in 
head seas of a Frisland class destroyer. The phase 
angles are relative to a wave crest at midship. No full- 
scale phase angles are available because random sea 
analysis was used. The theoretical calculations were 
based on the strip theory of Gerritsma and Beukelman 
(1967).
  The agreement between theory, model tests and full 
scale is reasonably good. The scatter in the full-scale 
results is probably due to the inaccuracies of measur- 
ing the incident waves. At low frequencies Oong


waves) the vessel contours the waves as 
shown by the fact that the heave amplitude 
approaches the wave amplitude, the pitch 
amplitude is the same as the wave slope, and 
the phase angles were 0 deg and  -  90 deg 
for heave and pitch, respectively. At high 
frequencies the motions go to zero. The 
heave natural frequency occurs where the 
heave phase angle shifts  radically, but the 
maximum responses occur at much lower 
fre- quencies.
  The two different theoretically calculated 
response curves shown in each graph of Fig.  
55 are  the  result of using two different 
values of pitch radius of gyra-


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	71
(a)	Fn	15

180	180
1.0
<I)	u,
w	w
90	90 w
IX
C)	(.'.)
w
00	00
t		-	t





,ui


_180


.6	_110
.5
11,•.JI
.x


<	H
O	.3



11.


',
u.
1A 
.2
.
,





0	.s L
It


0
to	1.5
	0
	.s L


L.,-1.0	1.5



 	 
\1\61.4   1.2    1.0	.I	1.816 t4   \2    1.0	.8	.6
- L	-L-,'L
(b) Fn•. 30

110	180
1.0
<I)	<I)


w
90 w
er	.9
(!)


w
90  w
er
(!)


0  0	.I	0 0
·. +


_ 90   ....._.	.7	_90


.'...



.&	_110


w	l:
t .&	_,ao


\
\
t .5	.5	' ....



11,..11
J
Cl .3
0.


U •.JI
.x _,
Hen



.L


.. 3


. .2	.	.2
.,	.,



0	0
0	.s ii,..1.0	1.5	0	.5L,t



1.0	1.5


..		1.81.61.L  1.2   1.0	.8	.&	..	\lt61.4 12    1.0	.8	.6
-L,'L	---L1"L
 	    EXPERIMENT{• SUM OF SE.CTIONS
o WHOLE MODEL
--	 	CALCULATIONS
 	 CALCULATIONS WITHOUT DYNAMIC EFFECTS
-· CALCULATIONS WITHOUT DYNAMIC EFFECTS AND SMITH EFFECT

Fig. 54 Total wave force and moment on a restrained ship model (Gerritsma and Beukelman, 1967)









1.0


t
a
) 
R
U
N
 
1
3
Fn•.36	Va22.91 Kn.


(
 
b
)
 
R
U
N
?
F
n
•
.
3
7
	
V
•
2
4
.
1
1
 
K
n
.


t
o












1.0


( 
c
) 
R
U
N 
1
5
Fn•.44	Vs28.16 Kn.

 








1£:""



0.5


,.
,
IC"



0.5



IC'
"'



0.5










ll,.JI
,s:.:.-.
.•.



0


1.0



0.5


0



0



1.0


ll,.JI
0.5

I
C
"
"

0
..
•
.,









,i...n

It:"'

.•.



0



1.0



0.5



0



,,
;g
n
r=­ ii
m
(I)
0.,,
z


•	I;, 90
0•
l..,.  0
H



& 90
0


0
.....
H


.•. 90
"'

0
....
H




r-
►;g
n
::c
:::::j
mn


w _go
..,.
w•


..,. .90
w0


....
w


_90


--1
C
;g
m


_ 110



_270


_360











0
	
0.5
	
1.0
	
1.5
	
2.0

L/L
w-


- 110


_270



_360











0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0

 


_1,0


_27
0


-360










0
	
0
.
5
	
1
.
0
	
1
.
5
	
2
.
0
L
/
L
;
-
-



Fig. 55 Comporison of full-scole meosurement, model experiment and calculation, H.M.S. Groningen, from Gerritsma and Smith (1966)


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	73



tion, k 5 , where k/A = /55 • The difference between the 
two curves shows the influence the pitch radius of 
gyration has on the heave and pitch motions in head 
seas. For this particular small, high-speed  ship  the 
peak motion amplitudes increase with decreasing ra­ 
dius of gyration and the responses at higher frequen­ 
cies are in general decreased slightly. For other ships 
just the opposite behavior might result; it depends on 
the hull form, forward speed, and wavelength. Beu­ 
kelman and Huijser (1977) and Loukakis and Chrys­ 
sostomidis (1975) both discuss the effects of pitch 
radius of gyration on  motions  in  head seas, showing 
in general a decrease in motions with a decreasing 
radius of gyration.
  Fig. 56 shows a complete set of non-dimensional 
response amplitudes in all six degrees of freedom for  
an aircraft carrier at twenty-five knots. These results 
were computed by Baitis, et al (1981) using the U.S. 
Navy's SMP Program.
  As can be seen, the theoretical results agree rea­ 
sonably well with the experiments for most of the 
cases. The surge motion is small except in following 
seas, where the experimental results are larger than 
theory. In beam seas the theoretical surge motion is 
zero because the exciting force goes to zero and the 
program neglects almost all coupling between surge 
and the heave and pitch motions. The experiments 
show a small surge amplitude in beam seas which 
probably results from cross coupling between the 
modes and higher order terms in the exciting forces. 
The model tests were conducted with a _self-propelled 
model. The effects of the unsteady motion on the pro­ 
peller thrust, which is neglected in ship-motion theory, 
is probably a major source of disagreement. Surge 
motion is one of the areas in which more research is 
needed.
  The pitch and heave motions are similar to the re­ 
sults we have seen previously. As in the case of surge, 
the pitch motion becomes very small in beam seas, but 
it is most severe in head seas. The sway, yaw and roll 
motions will be discussed in the next subsection.
  Gerritsma (1960) has experimentally  investigated 
the pitch and heave motions of Series 60 parent forms 
of Cs = 0.60, 0.70 and 0.80. Fig. 57 shows the non­ 
dimensional results as a  function  of  Froude  number 
in head seas for different wavelength-to-ship length 
ratios. The low-speed trends were estimated because 
wall interference affected the results.
  Fig. 57 clearly indicates the effects of wave fre­ 
quency and forward speed in head seas. In general a 
reduction in forward speed will reduce the heave and 
pitch motion in long wavelengths and increase the mo­ 
tion in short wavelengths. The motions in short waves 
(LwlL < 1.0) are significantly less than in longer wave­ 
lengths.
  Fig. 57 also shows that hull form has only minor 
effects on the motions in head seas. Although the three 
models covered a range of form parameters, relatively



small changes in the nondimensional amplitudes re­ 
sult. This indicates that the most important 
parameters for seakeeping responses in head seas are 
ship length, wavelength, wave amplitude and 
forward speed. In Section 8 of this Chapter a 
complete discussion of the influence of design 
parameters on seakeeping per­ formance will be 
presented.
  As a final example for this subsection, Fig. 58 (Ta­ 
kagi, et al 1985) shows the heave response versus 
wave period of a model (L=l.747m  and scale ratio of 
1/64)  of a semi-submersible oil drilling rig in bow 
seas. This figure is intended to illustrate  the  fact  that  
vessels that are not ship-shaped can have very 
different re­ sponse curves from those previously 
shown. Semi-sub­ mersibles are designed to have a 
very low response at normal wavelengths. Note the 
zero heave response in wave periods below 1.0 sec 
model scale or 8.0 sec full scale. Consequently, the 
heave natural frequency  is very low and the large 
response around a model wave period of 3 seconds in 
Fig. 58 results. It should be clear that semi-
submersibles are typically much different from ships 
and that the strip theory presented in the previous 
section cannot be applied.
3.8 The Transverse Motions.
  (a)	General. The three motions, roll, sway and 
yaw, are known as the transverse motions of a 
vessel. If only linearized equations of motion are 
considered, these motions are uncoupled from the 
longitudinal mo­ tions discussed in the previous 
sub-section. That is, these motions can be computed 
without reference to heave, pitch and surge. The 
decoupling of these two sets of motions is a good 
assumption for typical ships in moderate seaways. 
However, extreme seaways, un­ usual ship forms or 
unsymmetric mooring systems may require the 
treatment of all six degrees of free­ dom 
simultaneously. In this section we will only con­ 
sider the situation where the transverse motions are 
decoupled from the longitudinal motions. The trans­ 
verse motions are strongly coupled to one another, 
but the character of each motion is different. Sway 
and yaw motions have no hydrostatic restoring 
forces and do not display any resonant behavior. Roll, 
on the other hand, has restoring forces and typically 
displays very marked resonant motions.
  The transverse motions are important in the oper­ 
ation of a ship, but for much different reasons from 
those for the longitudinal motions. For instance, roll 
is certainly the most severe angular motion experi­ 
enced by a ship, often exceeding the "small angle" 
range of ten or fifteen degrees. These large roll 
angles can make working on the ship difficult and 
can lead to motion sickness. Further, the transverse 
motions are responsible for significant athwartship 
accelerations. The forces resulting from these 
accelerations must be resisted by machinery 
foundations and cargo lashings. These same 
accelerations also make it difficult for the ship's 
personnel to operate the ship. In fact, roll mo­ tions 
are a major limiting factor in the operability of


 




offshore platforms.
  The hydrodynamics involved in the computation of 
the transverse motions is more complicated than  that 
of the longitudinal motions, since viscous effects play 
an important role. For instance,  if a ship is underway,  
a sway velocity or a yaw angle relative to the path of 
the ship (or both) can place the ship hull at an apparent 
angle of attack to the flow. Significant transverse lift
.forces and moments are created on the ship hull and 
appendages as a result of the generation of vorticity. 
These forces are not modelled by the slender-body 
potential flow analysis covered in the previous sub- 
sections. For accurate predictions, terms representing
.these effects may have to be added to those shown in 
Table 13 in Section 3.4. There are indications that these



forces and moments are important at low frequencies 
(in the analysis of steering and maneuvering or of the 
motions in stern seas), at high forward speed,  and in 
the computation of the roll damping. Their role in typ- 
ical, wave-induced sway and yaw motions is not con- 
firmed. In addition to lift effects, the hydrodynamics 
associated with roll motion includes many other im- 
portant components, the overall effect of which is often 
treated simply as an effective roll damping, as sug- 
gested by the Be term in B44I Table 13.
  Much less is known about the transverse motions in 
general, and yaw motions in specific, than is known 
about the longitudinal motions discussed in the pre- 
vious sub-sections. A good part of this discrepancy is 
due to the fact that model testing of these motions is



















9
5
(/)
z

m
(/)

---.._: ..	I  A/L"G,I
 

 

Fig. 57 Heave and pitch responses in regular head seas for  three Series 60 
models (Gerritsma, 1960) (A is Lwl


76	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

more difficult. Longitudinal motions can be tested  in 
an ordinary resistance towing tank fitted with a uni- 
directional wave marker at one end. Serious yaw mo- 
tions only occur in quartering seas, and  roll motions 
are also worst for most large ships when they are 
underway in quartering seas. These  conditions  can 
only be reproduced in a large basin in which the length 
and width dimensions are  comparable.  Further,  tests 
in quartering seas require the model to have six de- 
grees of freedom, and self-propelled models with au- 
tomatic steering to maintain course are often required. 
It is possible to test for zero speed roll and sway 
motions in a narrow resistance towing tank by placing 
the model's centerline perpendicular to that  of  the 
tank. Indeed much of the insight into the nature of 
rolling that has been  obtained  comes from  this  kind 
of test. Comprehensive experimental validation of the 
theoretical prediction of transverse motion by slender 
body or other theories is, however, generally not avail- 
able.
  The results of application of the U.S. Navy's SMP 
slender-body program (Baitis, et aI, 1981) for the air- 
craft carrier CVA 59 were shown in Fig. 56, Section 
3.7, together with experimental results for waves at 
various headings. The comparison for sway, yaw and 
roll (rudder fixed) is shown to be good for beam and 
bow sea conditions. In quartering seas  the  yaw  and 
roll predictions are less accurate. Special problems do 
arise in the experimental technique for tests in which 
the seas approach from the stern or nearly so. First, 
fewer waves are encountered during a run, since the 
ship and wave are travelling in the same direction. 
Second, the effects of the automatic steering become 
more significant. In the same report in which the CVA 
59 results appear, Baitis gives the comparison of the 
predicted and measured results for the motions of a 
destroyer escort (DE-1006). The correlation between 
the motions predicted by  SMP and the  measurements 
is quite poor, and it is unclear whether the  difficulty 
lies with the theoretical predictions or the experimental 
method.
Chapter IX, Controllability, discusses the motions of
yaw and sway in relation to the  problem of steering, 
or course-keeping, in both calm water and waves.
  (b)	Roll motions. Roll motions are by far the most 
difficult motions of a ship to predict. It is therefore 
appropriate to discuss this motion separately, even 
though it is strongly coupled with  sway and  yaw.  It  
is an accepted fact of ship hydrodynamics that the 
damping arising from the creation of waves (the prin- 
cipal source of damping for heave, pitch, sway and 
yaw) is almost vanishingly small for the rolling of 
typical ship forms. Other mechanisms for damping, 
such as viscous effects, occur naturally.  However, 
these mechanisms lead to roll dampings which are no 
larger than the wave damping, and thus the total 
damping from all sources is still small. It is typical for 
roll motions to have an effective nondimensional damp-


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	n



ing ratio of considerably less than 5 percent for a bare­ 
hulled ship. Waves that have an encounter frequency 
near roll resonance can, and do, cause typical ships to 
roll severely. These large roll angles can give rise to


angle about the y-axis. x and z are chosen to be such 
that in the new system  /42 + A42   = 0 and  /52 + 
Aa2 = 0. Thus,


strong nonlinearities in the hydrodynamic damping 
and sometimes in the static roll restoring moment.
These  conditions  further  complicate  any  analysis  of


t = Ua2 + As2)/(fl. + A22), and
= (/42 + A42) I (a + A22).


(169)


roll motions.
  In order to discuss roll motions, we will assume that 
the ship is exposed to a single, unidirectional wave 
train and the transverse motions in response to this 
wave are sinusoidal. The linearized equations of motion 
for this situation based on slender-body theory were 
given in Section 3.4. Inclusion of the nonlinearities 
mentioned above is not generally possible in such a 
set of equations, since they lead to responses that 
include frequencies other than the exciting frequency. 
Exact treatment of these nonlinearities requires a so­ 
lution in the time domain, with the hydrodynamic ef­ 
fects represented as convolution integrals.
  However, it is common to include roll nonlinearities 
in an approximate way, using the concept of equivalent 
linear coefficients. These linear coefficients are selected 
so that they have the same integrated effect over one 
cycle of sinusoidal motion as the sum of the linear and 
nonlinear terms has over the same cycle. The assump­ 
tion is that motion, including the nonlinearities, is still 
approximately sinusoidal, and that the principal effect 
of the nonlinearities is to change the amplitude of the 
response. The equivalent linear coefficients are not con­ 
stants but depend primarily on the amplitude of the 
resulting motion and the ship's forward speed. Itera­ 
tion is required to obtain correspondence between the 
values used in the equations of motion and the am­ 
plitude of the resulting motion. The U.S. Navy's SMP 
slender-body program previously mentioned incorpo­ 
rates such an iteration, although the formulation of 
equivalent linear roll damping is different from that 
presented later in this section.
  For our purpose the three transverse equations of
motion can be extracted from the general Equations 
(132), Section 3.3, by selecting j = 2, 4, 6. The equiv­ 
alent linear damping coefficient for roll will be denoted 
by B  4 (lif41}, and the equivalent  linear  restoring coef­ 
ficient for  roll  will be denoted  by  C 4(lif41). The  non­ 
linearities become unimportant  for  small  amplitudes 
of roll, and in this case B (lif4I) .... B«, and C (l'1f41)
.... fl.g. GMr, as given in Table 13. For convenience in
notation, B 4 and C will be presented without an 
argument in the development below and the depend­ 
ence of these quantities on the sinusoidal amplitude lif4 1 
is  implied.  The  sway,  yaw  and  roll  equations  of 
motion are, however, strongly coupled.
  For the zero forward-speed case it is possible to 
isolate the effects of roll by a selection of a different 
ship-fixed coordinate system. The origin of the new 
system relative to the origin  of  the xyz  system is (x,  
0, z,) and the axes of the new system are rotated an


\(, is chosen so that 146  + A46   = 0 in the new system.
The roll equation of motion in this system becomes
[ -w.2(/44 + A44) + iweb 4 + c:4J Tf4
+ h42Tf2 + h4s'ifs = 1'4	(170)
The hydrodynamic coefficients and the roll moment 
are determined about this new origin, often called the 
roll center. A circumflex has been placed over these 
quan­ tities as they do have magnitudes that differ from 
those previously given. Since the ship is assumed to be 
slen­ der and l/J is very little different from 0, the 
instan­ taneous roll angle measured about this new axis 
is not sensibly different from 'f14 • The hydrostatic term, 
C is also not sensibly different from C*44 since	is 
small and there is no hydrostatic restoring in sway and 
yaw. In the subsequent discussion we  assume  that  
these two quantities can be interchanged with their 
circum­ flexed counterparts.
  The sway, yaw and roll equations of motion are now 
inertially decoupled from each other. That is, if one 
measures the motions about the roll center, sway and 
yaw accelerations do not instantly lead to roll accel­ 
erations, and vice versa. The transformation is anal­ 
ogous to the selection of principal axes of inertia in 
rigid body mechanics, and the roll center plays the role 
of the effective center of gravity. However, one should 
realize that since the Aii are functions of encounter 
frequency, the roll center is also. A very rough esti­ 
mate for the location of the roll center is halfway 
between the center of gravity and the center of buoy­ 
ancy.
  Roll is still coupled to the sway and yaw 
equations, but now only through the coefficients b42 
and b4, , and this coupling is not strong. In particular, 
if these two coefficients are identically zero then the 
uncoupling is complete, even with forward speed. 
The motions re­ sulting from an initial roll 
disturbance in calm water will result in pure roll 
about the roll center. One should
note that a ship in a seaway does not  actually  roll 
about the roll center, since there will be other motions 
as well. This is important in design of devices to 
control rolling, for the apparent vertical for a shipboard 
ob­ server is affected by these other motions (Section 
6).
  In order to characterize the roll behavior of a ship, 
the damped oscillatory motion in calm water that re­ 
sults from the application of a time-harmonic pure roll 
moment will be examined. If we ignore the coupling
terms h42 and b46 • Equation (170) becomes that of a
simple harmonic oscillator with nonlinear damping and 
restoring,


78	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE
12	other frequencies are usually not large.
  To examine the roll behavior in the region of roll 
resonance, (171) is recast in nondimensional form by


a: 10

w


div
idi
ng 
by 
C44 
= 
gt,,
. 
G
MT
, 
yie
ldi
ng


0..
0	8


::::;


[
- 
w
.
2 
+
 
2
i
w
.-
J
3
*
(
1
T
f
4
I) 
+
 -
y
*
(I
T
f
4
I)
] 
T
f
4 
= 
/
4	(172)
whe
re


6	w. = w.l wn


, the nondimensional encounter


<
w

4
faf.:l
2	-


freq
uenc
y,
J3*(1Tf4I) = /J 
4•W
n/(g
b.,G
Mr), 
the 
non
dim
ensi
onal 
dam
ping 
ratio
,
-y• (!Tf.l) = C 4 
/(gt,,.. GMT), the 
nondimensional 
roll
     
r
e
s
t
o
r
i
n
g
 
t
e
r
m
,

 
 
 


0
0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5	2.0
NONDIMENSIONAL FREQUENCY, r"oe
Fig. 59 Comparison of the  computed  roll  response  of  a  typical  ship with 
and without bilge keels (RAO is magnification factor)


ment amplitude, and
Wn4    =	ga ,GMr  l <l«  + .A.44), the  roll
	
reson­ ance frequency.
  Although wn is called the roll resonance 
frequency, it should  be  no4 ted that it can  be 
considered  to be so
only for motions small enough for C 4  = gt,,.. GMr(i.e.,


-y* = 1). wn is simply a reference frequency used for


[ -w.2( 1..4 + .A.44) + iw,b 4 + c 4J Tf4 = 1'4 (171)
  This is the equation usually adopted for the analysis 
of roll motions (Conolly, 1969). It should be emphasized 
that use of an uncoupled roll equation like (171) implies 
that the center of the coordinate system is at the roll 
center, that the above-mentioned two coupling terms 
are ignored, and that a different roll center may be 
required for each frequency. The roll  moment about 
the roll center, l'E x4 , is composed of both hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic  components.  However, frequencies
near the roll resonance are often so low that the prin­ 
cipal component of l'E x4 is the hydrostatic ne. An


nondimensionalization. Further, wn  is  itself  
formally a function of encounter frequency, 
since the added mass moment of inertia, .A.44, 
is also. Fortunately,
.A.44 is much smaller than J.4 for tyP.ical ship forms,
and the dependence of the sum, J.4 +.A.44, on 
frequency is quite weak. It will be assumed that 
the .A.44 is con­ stant and equal to its  value at  
the roll resonance, since
this discussion is aimed at the behavior near roll 
res­ onance. The quantity J3*(1Tf41) is the ratio of 
the equiv­ alent linear roll damping to the critical  
damping,  and as indicated it is dependent on the 
roll amplitude, 1Tf4'-


stimate  of  l'E  x 4 in such  a  region  is ga-GM-f where
f  is the  amplitude of  wave slope in radians. For ships
that have high metacentric heights relative to their 
beam (as is common in small craft) the hydrodynamic 
effects can be large and such an estimate may not be 
applicable.





t 15 w



HEAD SEAS



STERN SEAS


Often  a  ship model  in experimental  studies is con­
strained to roll about an axis that passes through the 
ship's center of gravity. Tests of this type (or com­ 
putations using slender-body theory in which the cen­ 
ter of the coordinate system is different from the roll 
center) do yield the coefficients which appear  in the 
full equations of transverse motion. However, these 
coefficients must be translated to the roll center if they 
are  to be  used directly  in the  single equation  of   roll
(171). Finally, one is most often  interested  in the roll


C    12  -1-------1-- ----.1,£--- 	:,,,,.i----..,,,.,._-1

0..
9+--------¥----+----l---,,---.:::+----""-c-


motion near resonance, since even in an irregular sea­


0 ...1==::;;;;.;:::=::::...J 	


_J,   	


-	........--1


way most of the roll motion is due to the roll response 
in this neighborhood. In this case it is usually a sat­


180	135	90	45	0
HEADING (DEG.)


isfactory simplification to treat the roll center as fixed 
at its position at resonance. The errors involved at


Fig. 60 Short-crested roll response at 18 knots as a function of seaway 
and heading


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	79
For ty ical ship forms Tn :::: 2.27 ,BI .J(g,GM),
















/4 is often called the effective wave slope, since for 
long waves the amplitude of the nondimensional mo­ 
ment is exactly equal to the wave slope amplitude,
as discussed above.	'
  The three quantities: wn , ,8*(17141) and y* (171,1) char­ 
acterize the roll response 4and determination of these 
three quantities is normally  the focus  of  an  analysis 
of rolling.
  For  normal  ship types  y* (1714 1) is  determined  from 
ship hydrostatics, Chapter I. Unusual ship forms, and 
particularly high-speed craft, can have somewhat dif­ 
ferent roll stability at forward speed than at zero speed 
(see the previous sub-section). It is possible for there 
to be multiple solutions for the roll motion for a given 
roll moment input if the righting arm, GZ, differs 
greatly from a linear relationship with the roll angle. 
Although this possibility is much discussed in the lit­ 
erature (see Battacharya, 1978), the righting arm 
curve for most ships is linear enough for this not to 
be a problem. A righting arm curve that increases with
'ij"4   faster  than  GM r•714    will  lead  to  a  roll  resonant 
frequency that increases with roll amplitude and vice 
versa. The nonlinearity of the righting arm curve is 
usually not significant for roll angles less  than  about 
20 deg. However, examination of the righting arm 
curve for the ship in question is necessary to determine 
if the predicted motions are sufficiently large for this 
effect to be important. It will be assumed  below that 
the roll motion is small enough to approximate C* 44 
by gA•GM r (that is, it will be assumed that -y* 1).
The roll resonant period is given by
T   =	27T=	27Tk 4	(173)
 


where B 1s the beam of the ship. The constant 2.27 can 
vary by as much as 20 percent for unusual ship forms. 
or instance, aircraft carriers have a flight deck much 
wider than B and, as a result, 4 is much larger than for a 
normal ship of the same beam. For this case,
a constant of 2.6 or more may be appropriate. On the 
other hand, submarines which are round and have no 
superstructure can have constants less than 2.0 when 
Bis taken to be the maximum beam.
Of the three quantities that characterize roll motion
,8*(11141), the damping parameter, is the most cruciai one 
for the ship response. Equation (171) can be solved for 
1714 I f4I, the ratio of the roll amplitude to the effec­ tive 
wave slope amplitude. This quantity is called the roll 
response amplitude operator (RAO). For ships with small 
roll damping in beam seas  the peak of  the RAO is equal 
to 1 / (2,8*), and this occurs  near  the resonant f equen y,  
w.       1. A typical ship without roll suppres­
sion devices such as  bilge keels or the like  will have   a 
value of /J* less than 5 percent. This means that at 
resonance,  the  ship will roll  at  more than 10 times the
effective wave slope (RAO > 10). Thus, it is not un­ 
common to observe significant rolling in what appears to 
be an almost calm sea. Figure 59 shows the com­ puted 
roll response of a typical bare-hulled ship  in bea!Il seas. 
The v ry narrow and "spiked" response is typical of the 
motions measured in careful model tests.
,8* is the most difficult parameter to estimate because 
the phenomena that govern roll damping are so com­ 
plicated. Some details of the phenomena involved and 
current methods of estimating roll damping are dis­ 
cussed under the next heading.
  The roll resonant periods of 10 to 16 seconds are normal 
for typical large ships. Waves with lengths orresponding to 
these periods are common  only dur­ mg heavy storm  
conditions.  However,  severe  rolling c n o cur in u h 
lighter seas with shorter  wave  pe­ riods 1f the ship 1s 
underway and the seas are coming


0.25.------------------.



i7i
c.i

w 0
cl
..J
5a:


n4	Wn4	.Jg,GM
where the radius of gyration

k4   =	144   :	A44 





·0·25 0:' "------2...10_.... 4.J.o_.... 60.1.-
......._a..Jo---10...10_.... .J120

TIME (SEC)

Fig. 62a Time history of the roll 
decay of a typical ship


80


I
...,
..:I

::>

w
...I


...I
(5
a:




0.20









0.10








0.00


PR
IN
CI
PL
ES 
OF 
NA
VA
L 
AR
CH
IT
EC
TU
RE

m
o
d
e
r
a
t
e
 
s
e
a
s
.
 
F
o
r
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
s
h
i
p
s
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
l
l
i
n
g
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
r
e
 
w
o
r
s
t
 
i
n
 
b
e
a
m
 
s
e
a
s
 
a
n
d
 
s
e
v
e
r
e
 
r
o
l
l
i
n
g
 
c
a
n
 
o
c
c
u
r
 
e
v
e
n
 
w
h
e
n
 
n
o
t
 
u
n
d
e
r
w
a
y
.
 
D
e
t
a
i
l
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
p
h
e
n
o
m
e
n
a
 
i
n
­
 
v
o
l
v
e
d
 
a
n
d
 
c
u
r
r
e
n
t
 
m
e
t
h
o
d
s
 
o
f
 
e
s
t
i
m
a
t
i
n
g
 
r
o
l
l
 
d
a
m
p
i
n
g
 
a
r
e
 
d
i
s
c
u
s
s
e
d
 
u
n
d
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
n
e
x
t
 
h
e
a
d
i
n
g
.
  T
h
e
 
f
a
c
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
l
l
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
 
i
s
 
s
o
 
l
a
r
g
e
 
h
a
s
 
l
e
d
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
a
 
v
a
r
i
e
t
y
 
o
f
 
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 
s
c
h
e
m
e
s
 
f
o
r
 
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
a
p
p
a
r
e
n
t
 
r
o
l
l
 
d
a
m
p
i
n
g
.
 
M
o
s
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
s
c
h
e
m
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
S
e
c
t
i
o
n
 
6
.
 
B
i
l
g
e
 
k
e
e
l
s
 
a
r
e
 
s
o
 
c
o
m
m
o
n
p
l
a
c
e
,
 
h
o
w
e
v
e
r
,
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
y
 
d
e
s
e
r
v
e
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
t
r
e
a
t
e
d
 
h
e
r
e
.
 
T
h
e
s
e
 
a
p
p
e
n
d
a
g
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
u
s
u
a
l
l
y
 
c
o
n
s
t
r
u
c
t
e
d
 
f
r
o
m
 
f
l
a
t
 
p
l
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
f
o
r
m
 
a
 
s
h
a
r
p
 
o
b
s
t
r
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
l
l
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
,
 
a
s
 
s
h
o
w
n
 
i
n
 
F
i
g
.
 
6
1
.
 
T
h
e
 
b
i
l
g
e
 
k
e
e
l
 
i
s
 
a
l
i
g
n
e
d
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
l
m
 
w
a
t
e
r
 
f
l
.
o
w
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
t
h
e
 
m
o
v
i
n
g
 
s
h
i
p
 
s
o
 
t
h
a
t
 
i
t
s
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
s
i
s
t
a
n
c
e
  
i
s
 
m
i
n
i
m
a
l
.
  
F
l
o
w
  
v
i
­
s
u
a
l
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
 
s
t
u
d
i
e
s
 
a
r
e
 
o
f
t
e
n
 
p
e
r
f
o
r
m
e
d
 
d
u
r
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
­
 
s
i
s
t
a
n
c
e
 
t
e
s
t
s
 
t
o
 
a
i
d
 
i
n
 
t
h
i
s
 
p
l
a
c
e
m
e
n
t
.
 
T
h
e
 
h
e
i
g
h
t
 
o
f


0	2	4	6	8	10	12
SWING  NUMBER, J
Fig, 62b Roll decay mean swing angle f. and decrement, 6f

0.05



0.04


ui
C	0.03
<


the bilge keel is usually selected to be such that 
the tip of the bilge keel lies within the maximum 
beam of the ship and above the baseline. In this 
way the bilge keel is protected by the hull during 
docking, drydock­ ing and in shallow water. Bilge 
keels offer a significant improvement in the roll 
damping over that of a bare ship hull, but fall far 
short of the damping that can  be obtained from 
other roll stabilization devices. None­ theless, it is 
considered prudent naval architecture to install 
bilge keels when practical, even when other 
stabilizers are fitted, since only bilge keels are 
effective in the severest of seas.
  Using a theory similar to the one presented 
above, Schmitke (1978) presents comparisons of 
the theoret­


..: 0.02
w
:wE
a:
0w
C	0.01


0.00











0.0	0.1	0.2
MEAN 
SWING  
ANGLE,   m 
(RADIANS)
Fig.  62c     
Roll 
decay  
test data  
extinctio
n curve


ical 
rollin
g 
respo
nses 
and 
mode
l test 
result
s for 
a 
frig­ 
ate 
over 
a 
range 
of 
wave
lengt
hs 
and 
for 
four 
differ
ent 
ship-
wave 
headi
ngs. 
The 
meas
ured 
effec
ts of 
chan
ging

3
0
      
,
-
-
-
-
-
,
-
-
-
-
.
-
-
-
-
-
r
-
-
-
.
.
-
-
-
,
-
-
-
-
,


0w
I.U



from the quarter. Although this orientation causes the


3:
a:
w UJ


2.0


effective wave slope to be reduced somewhat from its


0z	N


value in beam seas, the encounter period becomes


C, I.,


greater than the wave period and resonance can occur. 
(See discussion Section 4.8). Fig. 60 shows the com­ 
puted variation in significant roll response in short­ 
crested seas for a typical ship proceeding at its design 
speed at various headings and sea states. For this ship 
the worst motions occur when the seas come from a 
heading from 15 to 80 deg aft of the beam. For ships 
with normal GM,Js and speeds, this worst heading can 
vary from almost abeam to 45 deg abaft the beam. On 
the other hand, many barges and small ships have


z	z
a:
:E :E
;§ 0
...J ::i



1.0





u"'o-- 02._,._.







1.0	2	3.D

_,o,,!,,-tt..--.0.."'13--u"".a--..,.,..,,,JJ- 12
Fn


GM,Js comparable to their beam and their resonant 
periods often correspond to the periods observed in


Fig. 63


Effect of speed on roll damping, for unstabilized ships with or without
bilge keels (Miller, et al 1973)






200


M
OT
IO
NS 
IN 
W
AV
ES

e
x
p
r
e
s
s
e
d
  
i
n
 
a
n
 
e
x
p
a
n
s
i
o
n
  
i
n
 
l
1
f
4
 
1
g
i
v
e
n
  
b
y
"'
fl* 
<11141
) =	/3* n   l114r
n=O
=
 
f
3
*
o
 
+
 
/
3
*
1
 
1
7
1
4
1
 
+
 
/
3
*
2
1
7
1
4
1
 
+
 
·
·
·
,


81




(174)






150









100









so














































.002   .003
	.00
5	.01	.02	.03	.OS	0.10
B.K.A:5
PECT 
RATIO, 
""aK/)'6
K
Fig. 64 Bilge-keel 
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
c
y
 
i
n
 
W
a
t
a
n
a
b
e
-
I
n
o
u
e
 
m
e
t
h
o
d
 
(
H
i
m
e
n
o
,
 
1
9
8
1
)


where each of 
the /3*n are a 
function of 
forward 
speed. The 
first term 
represents 
linear 
damping and 
is as­ sociated 
principally 
with potential 
flow effects. 
This term 
includes 
contributions 
from the roll, 
sway and yaw 
damping 
coefficients 
listed in Table 
13, resulting 
from the 
change in 
coordinate 
system 
involved in 
in­ troducing 
the roll 
center. The 
second and 
third terms 
are associated 
with the 
damping that 
is due to real 
fluid effects, 
such as fluid 
drag and flow 
separation. In 
general,  /3*1  
and  /3*2    are  
positive  and 
the equivalent 
linear 
damping 
increases 
markedly with 
roll amplitude. 
Careful 
sinusoidal 
tests to 
determine the 
nature of the 
roll damping 
for a 
prototype ship 
are 
exceedingly 
difficult; those 
for a model are 
time 
consuming. A 
sim­ ple 
alternative is 
to conduct a 
transient test, 
called the roll 
extinction 
test. The 
model (or 
ship) is 
inclined to a 
relatively 
large roll 
angle and 
then released 
impul­ sively. 
The time 
history of the 
motion is then 
recorded. 
Because roll 
is so lightly 
damped, the 
model (or 
ship) 
oscillates at 
its natural 
frequency and 
a large 
number of 
rolls can be 
observed 
before the 
motion 
decays to a 
roll amplitude 
too small to 
measure 
accurately. 
See
Fig. 62a.
  The 
information in 
the time 
history can be 
used to 
determine the 
nonlinear 
coefficients of 
roll damping 
at the roll 
resonance 
frequency. Let 
4i be the 
absolute value 
of the roll 
angle (in 
radians) at 
thejth 
maximum


0.02


speed, GMT and bilge keel configuration are shown to 
be in generally good agreement with the theoretical 
predictions.
  (c) Estimation of roll damping. Two separate ap­ 
proaches have been used to estimate the roll damping 
of ship hulls, and both rely heavily on experimental 
results. The first approach involves direct experimen­ 
tation and is appropriate in the final design stages. 
The second uses a combination of analysis of the mech­ 
anisms of roll damping coupled with a correlation of 
historical experimental data with ship characteristics. 
The resulting formulas are very useful during the pre­ 
liminary design of the ship.
  It has been found through careful experimentation 
that the part of the roll damping that is not predicted 
by potential theory is not only a nonlinear function of 
roll angle, but is also a nonlinear function of roll fre­ 
quency and forward speed of the ship. It has also been 
found that there are many components to the roll











0.01







o.o
o.o













0.1	o.2   Fn	0.3


damping, each of which arises through a separate 
physical process. It will be assumed that /3* can be


Fig. 65 Comparison of measured and estimated roll damping coefficient as functions of advance 
speed (Himeno, 1981)


82	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE
(extreme  value).  The Ph decrement,  6g.  and  the j th	where


mean maximum amplitude (port and stkboard), gm,
are defined by:
6gi = (g4,j-1 - g4, j), and

 
Fig. 62b shows the determination of these quantities 
graphically, and Fig. 62c is a plot of 6gi versus gm, i, 
the so-called extinction curve. A cubic polynomial fit­ 
ted to these discrete points yields
           6g  Z     U.0  gm + al  gm2  +	gms	(175)
For a linear system the equivalent linear damping ratio 
at any mean angle is equal to the decrement divided 
by 1r. Thus, the relation between these coefficients and 
the  damping  coefficients  in  Equation  (174) is  /3*n     = 
an/ 1r for n = 0,1,2. An estimate of the nonlinear ef­ 
fects can therefore be made directly from an extinction 
test. Special caution should be observed when extinc­ 
tion tests are performed on small models since the 
viscous phenomena that produce these nonlinearities
cannot  be easily scaled  and the model may not behave


F= Fn / C 8 , and Fn = V!Ji[,, the 
Froude number.
  Fig. 63 shows a typical variation of 
roll damping with forward speed 
predicted by Equation (176b). Mill­ er's 
presentation has the advantage of being 
very easy to apply, but should be used 
with caution for typical commercial 
ships with very high midships 
coefficients. An alternate and more 
complicated approach was presented by 
Watanabe and Inoue (1964) and 
reported by Himeno (1981). This 
approximation was based on a detailed 
analysis of many typical commerical 
ships, including some very high-block 
coefficient tankers. This method 
addresses only the terms /3 and /3 in 
Equation (174). Using the same 
notation as above, Wa­ tanabe's method 
was simplified by Jan de Kat to yield
13<0> 0 = h [-2.03 (CoTIL) + 1.6 ( A8 K o- 0 / £2) + 0.064],
13<0      = h [0.45 ( C0  TI L ) + 1.6 (A  0	0/   £2) + 0.064],
(177)
where
h	 		 		185


like the prototype.
  For preliminary design purposes, it is necessary to 
estimate the roll damping of a design for which model 
or full-scale data are not available. Estimation proce­ 
dures based on historical data have  been  developed 
and two examples are presented here.
  The first was developed to predict the roll damping 
of typical naval ships. It was presented by Miller, et 
al. (1974) and  represents  the results of  a regression
analysis of a number of fairly round-bottomed and fine 
ships typically used by the U.S. Navy. The procedure


=  {( Y [l.O  + (:ZY] +f   6:.T}X	Cs'
F =Cw/+ (Cwp - 1)/10,
l = KG - T/2
KG is the height of the center of 
gravity above the keel, and
CwP is the waterplane coefficient.
The value o-0 is associated with the bilge keel effi­


involves two steps. First, the zero-speed damping ratio,
13<0>, is estimated as
13<0>(17f41) = 19.25 [ AB	+ 0.0024  L BJd,]
d\ /dl7f 1/  (Cs L B3  T)	(176a)
 
where
AsK is the total area of the bilge keels (port and 
starboard),
b8 K is the width of the bilge keel,
C8 is the block coefficient,
dis the distance from the centerline at the load 
waterline to the turn of the bilge,
L, Band Tare the ship's length, beam and draft, 
respectively,
1,;-41 is the roll amplitude in radians.
Second, the critical damping ratio, /3*(l1j" I), at for­


ciency and is a function of the block coefficient and
the aspect ratio of the bilge keel, given 
by b0K I lbk• where bsK is the width and 
l8 K is  the  length  of  the bilge keel. A 
plot of the bilge keel efficiency based 
on considerable experimental data is 
shown in Fig. 64. Himeno recommends 
the use of Takahashi's correction for 
forward speed, given by
/J*n = 13<0 >n [ 1.0 +
0.8 [1.0 -  e(-IOFn]/ w.2] n  = 0,1 ...	(178)
  (d)	Mechanisms involved in roll  
damping.  A much more fundamental 
approach to the problem of roll 
damping involves the examination of 
the individual mechanisms that lead to 
roll damping.  This  method has been 
favored by  Japanese  researchers  and  
most of the work on this approach has 
been done in Japan.


ward speed is
/3*(l'if41} = 13<0 >(l'if4I)


4
	
	
A
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
a
b
l
e
 
i
n
s
i
g
h
t
 
i
n
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
m
o
s
t
 
i
m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
p
a
r
a
m
­
 
e
t
e
r
s
 
g
o
v
e
r
n
i
n
g
 
r
o
l
l
 
d
a
m
p
i
n
g
 
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
 
a
c
h
i
e
v
e
d
 
b
y
 
c
a
r
e
f
u
l
l
y
 
e
x
a
m
i
n
i
n
g
 
e
a
c
h
 
i
n
g
r
e
d
i
e
n
t
.
 
H
i
m
e
n
o
 
(
1
9
8
1
)
 
p
l
o
t
s
 
q
u
a
l
i
t
a
t
i
v
e
 
g
r
a
p
h
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
t
o
t
a
l


+ 0.00085 (LIB)	L I GM  F {1 + F + 2F2)
(176b)


roll damping of a ship. The various 
components shown are denoted by:


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	83



  Br, the moment resulting from the drag (skin fric­ 
tion) of the hull in contact with seawater, a viscous 
fluid.
  BE• the moment on the bare hull arising as a result 
of pressures caused by viscous separation of the flow 
and formation of eddies, principally near sharp 
bilges.
  BL, the moment arising from hull side forces (lift 
forces), which are due to the apparent angle of at­ 
tack of the hull when the ship is rolling under way. 
Bw, the moment resulting from the creation of 
waves when the ship rolls. This is the moment nor­
mally computed by linear potential theory.
  B8 xN , the moment resulting from normal (pres­ 
sure) forces on just the bilge keels.
  BBKH, the moment resulting from the modification 
of the flow around the hull caused by the existence 
of bilge keels.
  BBxw, the moment arising from wave making  of 
the bilge keels (normally a small quantity for nor­ 
mal-sized bilge keels).

  Fig. 65 is reproduced from Himeno (1981) and shows 
a comparison of the measured and estimated roll damp­ 
ing coefficient for a Series 60, block 0.80 model. Al­ 
though a promising procedure for performing the 
calculations is presented by Himeno, it is too compli­ 
cated to duplicate here.
  The figure shows the comparatively large effect of 
the bilge keel terms BBKN and BBKH• The second (in­ 
teraction) term is due to a change in separation pattern 
around the hull resulting from a modification of the 
flow in the neighborhood of the bilge keel (Ikeda, et  
al., 1978). The figure also shows the strong effect of 
forward speed on the lift component, BL.
  (e)	Sway and yaw. As previously noted, sway and 
yaw can be calculated by means of the complete equa­ 
tions for lateral motion (Sections 3.3, 3.4)-at least in 
bow and beam seas. Schmitke (1978) presents approx­ 
imate solutions for sway assuming no coupling with 
roll and yaw, which compare moderately well with 
more exact results for a frigate at cruise speed.
  However, sway and yaw motions are strongly influ­ 
enced by ship steering, whether done manually or by 
means of an automatic control or auto-pilot. In turn, 
sway, yaw and roll characteristics all affect the design 
of the rudder, steering gear and control system. Sway­ 
ing of a fast moving ship places it at an angle of attack, 
producing transverse forces and moments, just as yaw­ 
ing does. These problems are discussed in Chapter IX, 
Controllability. The ultimate merging of the fields of 
seakeeping (where the motions are at wave frequency) 
and coursekeeping (where the motions occur much 
more slowly) into a complete theory of steering in


waves has not yet been accomplished.
  The relatively high-frequency yawing in bow seas 
generally poses no problems for either comfort of per­ 
sonnel or steering, since amplitudes are usually small. 
Hence, there is seldom any attempt made to control 
these motions in either hand or automatic steering. 
Early model tests in bow seas at the Davidson Labo­ 
ratory (Lewis and Numata, 1960) and at the Nether­ 
lands Ship Model Basin (Vossers, 1962) revealed 
unexpectedly large values of leeway angle between the 
mean model heading and the path made good across the 
tank. This angle varied with wave length and speed. 
This important non-linear effect is not ac­ counted for in 
the basic theory of ship motions in waves (See Section 5).
  In quartering and following seas, the wave-encoun­ 
ter frequencies are much lower than in head seas or seas 
on the bow. This situation can lead to large am­ plitudes 
of the unrestored motions of sway and yaw, to serious 
interactions with the steering, and, as dis­ cussed in the 
previous sub-sections, to large resonant rolling angles. 
The combination of these three motions is uncomfortable 
to crew and passengers. It is some­ times called a 
"dutch roll," since it is comparable to this well known 
motion of airplanes.
  In extreme high waves, where the water particle 
velocities become comparable to the ship speed, there is 
a possibility of loss of control and of broaching. This 
latter condition, when the ship yaws to an orientation 
parallel to the wave crests, is extremely dangerous and 
may lead to capsizing.
  (/) Roll  instability  and  capsizing.  Capsize  of large 
ships is fortunately very rare. Detailed theoret­ ical and 
experimental studies of these phenomena have been 
conducted by Oakley, Paulling and Wood (1974). These 
show that there are several different mecha­ nisms that can 
lead to capsize. Most of these mecha­ nisms are essentially 
nonlinear in  nature  and  cannot be investigated by the 
above simple frequency-domain approach. One 
mechanism, broaching, was discussed above.
  Another mechanism involves the static stability 
characteristics of roll in a seaway Paulling (1961). The 
wave surface is not plane and thus the instantaneous 
load waterline is not either. The metacentric radius 
derived from this waterline may differ somewhat from 
that computed for the still waterline. The GMr is very 
sensitive to the metacentric radius, and the result is that 
significant variations in GM r can occur with a 
frequency equal to the encounter frequency. The par­ 
ametric variation in GMr can lead to a roll instabilities, 
with roll motions increasing in time. These conditions 
are worst for ships with low initial stability and in stern 
seas or almost stern seas.


84	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Section 4
The  Ship  in a Seaway10


  4.1 Theory of Linear Response to a Statistically Sta­ 
tionary Seaway. Much if not  most  of  the  theory  of 
the linear response of a marine system to random 
excitation was developed in the context of electronics 
and communication (Rice, 1944), (Lee, 1960). A great 
deal of the resulting theoretical detail has been directly 
transferred to marine applications where it has been 
called the theory of linear superposition. There are, 
however, some significant differences that are peculiar 
to this application. These have to do with the idea that 
the wave field (or excitation) is a function of space as 
well as time, and that the vessel of interest is more 
often than not moving at some speed within the wave 
system. St. Denis and Pierson (1953) introduced the 
basic concepts to the marine field, and resolved  most 
of the problems peculiar to the application. Price and 
Bishop (1974) may serve those interested as a more 
modern and detailed treatment of both the basic theory 
and the problems of marine applications.
  A reasonable and useful (if not exact) model for 
realistic seaways is described in Section 2 in terms of 
statistically stationary, zero-mean, Gaussian (or nor­ 
mal) random processes.  While the  wave elevations  in 
a stationary wave process vary with time and  position 
in the wave field, the probability structure of the proc­ 
ess does not. That is, the statistical parameters that 
describe the process are constants. If the instanta­  
neous wave elevations of a Gaussian process are sam­ 
pled, the statistical properties of the sample are 
governed by a Gaussian probability density function; 
that is, the Gaussian assumption applies to wave ele­ 
vation. In a zero-mean Gaussian process the only nec­ 
essary statistical parameters are  the  wave  variance 
and its frequency/ direction decomposition (or spec­ 
trum).
Conceptually, once the spectrum of the stationary
Gaussian process is fixed, the variance and other sta­ 
tistics of the process are determined for all time and 
space. This is not, of course, what happens in the ocean. 
The magnitude of ocean waves and their spectrum 
varies continuously in time and space. In the long term 
and over long distances ocean waves are non-station­ 
ary. Unfortunately, we do not have a rigorous statis­ 
tical model for the response of a vessel to a non­ 
stationary process. This conflict is resolved by the 
assumption that the evolution of the  wave statistics 
in the vicinity of the vessel occurs gradually enough 
that we may approximate reality by a succession of 
space-time processes, each of which is considered sta­ 
tistically stationary in the short term and near field. 
This assumption allows the practical use of available 
theory for the response of a vessel to a stationary 
Gaussian random process.
In the study of the response of the ship to the sea-


way, the concepts of Section 2 that are of 
fundamental use are the wave point spectrum, 
S,(w), and the di­ rectional spectrum, S,(w, µ.). In 
this section a some­ what restrictive definition of 
the point spectrum will be employed. Here, we will 
use the point spectrum only to define long-crested 
random waves. It should also be noted at the outset 
that the direction variable,
µ., will be defined in the same way as in Section 3; 
that is, with respect to an x0 , Yo, z0 coordinate system 
fixed in the earth so that the x0-axis is coincident with 
the heading or nominal course of the ship. The angle, 
µ., in general will denote the direction of propagation 
of waves relative to the x0-axis, and is taken to be 
positive counter-clockwise so as to conform to a 
right-hand rule. The reader may note that these 
conventions are opposite to those usually employed at 
sea where the angle denotes the direction from which 
the waves come, and the sense of the angle is in 
accordance with the compass. We lose no generality 
with the conven­ tions of Section 3 since the 
directional spectrum may easily be transformed from 
one system  to the other, and in any event, absolute 
directions come into play only in operational use of 
the final results of the theory.
  Section 3 dealt with the physics of  the  response  of 
a vessel to deterministic wave fields (regular waves), 
and it may perhaps not be immediately obvious how 
these results may be connected with the probabilistic 
model of Section 2. Broadly speaking, the analyses of 
Section 3 define the vessel response as a linear trans­ 
formation of the wave elevation field. Results from 
the theory of probability say, in effect, that a linear 
trans­ formation of a stationary Gaussian random 
process yields another stationary Gaussian random 
process. Thus, so long as the vessel's response is 
mathemati­ cally linear (or reasonably so) an 
immediate connection may be made between the 
stationary Gaussian wave field and a stationary 
Gaussian representation of the response. Moreover, 
once the response can be assumed to be Gaussian, the 
statistics of response maxima may be treated in the 
same manner as the wave maxima. Thus, the most 
important general  observation  about the deterministic 
development of vessel response in Section 3 is that all 
the analyses are linearized. Lin­ earity of response is 
the fundamental  assumption  of the theory to be 
discussed here.
  In studying the response of a vessel in a seaway the 
pertinent end result of Section 3 is the complex am­ 
plitude, rfj, of the j !._h response to a regular wave of
complex amplitude  t , whose phase is referenced to
the origin of the coordinate system fixed in the vessel. 
Once the  vessel  geometry  is fixed,  there are  four 
es-


10 Section 4 written by John F. Dalzell.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	85


sentially independent variables !!1 the analysis of Sec­ 
tion 3: regular wave amplitude, t , circular frequency, 
w = 21r I T, and direction, µ, as well as vessel speed,
U0 • These are the same four independent variables in 
a laboratory test of a model vessel in regular waves. 
Now the theory to be discussed cannot handle temporal 
variations in vessel speed within a particular realiza­ 
tion of a random wave process. Thus for present pur­ 
poses, the speed, U0 , must be considered to be a 
constant parameter, just as it is in practical imple­ 
mentations of the theory of Section 3, as well as many 
experimental investigations; i.e., surge is assumed to 
be zero.
  The linearity assumption requires that the amplitude 
of the response be proportional to the exciting regular 
wave amplitude, and that the response phase be in­
variant with wave ampJ!tude. Thus in the notatiQ...n of 
Section 3, the ratio, 7'&/ t must be invariant with t for
fixed w, µ and U0 • In numerical evaluations of the 
theory of Section 3 this invariance is assumed and 
computations are usually carried out for a unit regular­ 
wave amplitude. Thus in practice, the results of the 
theory of Section 3, 7'&, are complex amplitudes per 
unit regular wave amplitude. Similarly, it is also con­ 
ventional to normalize experimental determinations of 
the complex response  amplitude  in the same  way.  It 
is then natural to m.Qdify the notation of Section 3 and 
let T'& represent 7'&/ ti• Thus, in this section
7j;(w, µ,; U0)  = the complexj th response amplitude per
unit regular wave _amplitude, as a 
function of wave frequency w, and 
direction µ, with constant vessel 
speed, U0  assumed.
  As noted in Section 3, the vessel responses are phys­ 
ically related to encounter frequency, w•. It will be 
noted from the definitions in Sections 2 and 3 that 
encounter frequency is determined by the variables in 
the argument of the function just defined. Thus, we 
may also consider the complex responses of  a  vessel 
to be functions of encounter frequency and define:
7'&(w., µ;  U)  = the  complex  j  th  response  amplitude



the relationships of the complex functions to normal­ 
ized amplitude and phases  of  response are as defined 
in Section 3, and the underlying fundamental assump­ 
tion is that the physical system is linear so that the 
relations between its response and its excitation  may 
be completely defined in this way.
  The modulus of the transfer function has special 
importance in the theory to be discussed, and bears a 
special name which is unique to marine usage. The 
terminology was originated by St. Denis and Pierson 
(1953)  where  IT'&(w., µ;  U0  )12 was  defined  as  the  re­ 
sponse amplitude operator. Over the  intervening 
years the custom much more often than not has been to 
define the unsquared IT'&(w., µ,; U0 ) j as the response 
amplitude operator, abbreviated RAO. The numerical 
consequences of confusing the squared and unsquared 
forms will be obvious to the reader, and it cannot be 
said that the squared form is no longer used in practice 
(Lackenby, 1978). However, for present purposes the 
unsquared form will be employed, and thus when re­ 
sponse amplitude operator or RAO is used here it will 
mean the ratio of the (scalar) amplitude  of  response 
and the exciting regular wave amplitude, and will usu­ 
ally be expressed as IT'&(w, µ,; U0 )I or IT'&(w., µ;   Uo)I,
  Now to illustrate the form of the connection 
between the theories of Sections 2 and 3, first note that 
from Section 3, Equation (96) the j'th response to a 
regular wave may be written in real form as:
11;(t) = IT'&(w.,  µ,; U0 )If cos [E -  w,t  + o-;(w.)]
where o-i(w.) is the phase of the response relative to 
the wave elevation and E represents an arbitrary phase 
that defines the elevation of a regular wave at  time 
zero, as given in Equation (25) of Section 2.2. The 
definiti9n of IT'&(w., µ; U0 )1, as noted above, corresponds
to 7'&/ t in the notation of Section 3. Thus the linear
transformation of the motions analysis produces a 
shift in phase, o-;(w.), and an amplitude 
proportional to the amplitude of the regular wave.
  The linear superposition theory of Section 2, and 
indeed all general linear system theory, demands 
that the response to a sum of exciting waves be 
equal to


0
per unit regular wave amplitude,  as 
a  function  of   wave  encounter  fre­
quency,  w., and  direction,  µ,  with


the sum of the responses to each of the individual 
wave components. Thus the response to a sum of 
regular waves each defined by it§. wave frequency, 
wm, direc­


constant vessel speed, U0 assumed.


tion, /J-n, and amplitude, tm,., becomes:


where it should be noted from Section 2.8 that the 
mapping from encounter to wave frequency may have 
to be handled carefully.
  The functions that have just been defined are anal­ 
ogous to those that result from the application of gen­ 
eralized linear systems theory in other fields. In marine 
usage these functions bear  various  borrowed  names; 
in particular, four common names used synonymously 
are: transfer function, frequency response function, 
system function and receptance. Whatever the ter­ 
minology, the physical meaning is as defined above,


11;(t) = LLl1f.;[(w.)m,., µ,.; Uo]I X
m n

        {mn COS [ Emn - (w,)mn t + o-i(w.) mn]]
	(179
)
The correspondence between Equation (179) and 
Equa­ tion (71) of Section 2.8 may be noted. The 
expressions are of identical form except that there is 
an additional factor of the mn'th RAO and an 
additional determi­ nistic phase in the argument of 
the cosine. If the ar­ bitrary wave phases, Em,., are 
assumed to be random


86	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



as in the representation of Section 2, the response may 
be interpreted as a random variable. Evaluating the 
variance of the response, (179), with the formalism of 
Section 2:
Var[11i(t)] = ([1i1 ( t )] 2)
= ½ LL l,jj[(w,}mn, µ,,.; Uo] l2 Im/	(180)
m n

where the brackets ( ) denote mean value. As in the 
random phase model of waves, Section 2, the variance 
of response becomes half the summation of squared 
response amplitudes.
  In an analogy to the directional wave spectrum of 
Section 2, we may also define a continuous pseudo­ 
spectrum of response, P;(w., µ,), whose integral equals 
the response variance:
2..    00
Var[11;(t)] =	P;(w., µ,) dw. dµ,	(181)
0 0


As one would expect by now, the  response  spectrum 
is the contribution to response variance of the deter­ 
ministic responses to all those wave components that 
produce encounter frequencies within an infinitesmal 
encounter frequency band. The summation appears 
within the limiting form, (185) because, as pointed out 
in Section 2.8, the same encounter frequency may be 
produced by wave components having different direc­ 
tions.
  The sections that follow contain a condensation of 
the principal results from response theory, and the 
resulting procedures, as applied to marine vehicles. 
They will begin with the simplest case and proceed to 
the more general.
  4.2 The Long-Crested, Zero-Speed Case. The long­ 
crested, zero-speed situation is at once the  simplest 
case of interest,  and  one that is essentially  the same  
as the basic communication or electronic theory. 
When the vessel is moored or hove-to an observer 
aboard the ship senses wave frequencies  without  
distortion  due to ship speed so that encounter and 
wave frequencies


Comparing Eqs. (180) and (181), the pseudo-spectrum 
may be identified as a limit as 6w.-+ 0 and 6µ-+ 0:

P;[(w.)mn, µ,,.] -+ [ ½ l,jj[(w,}mn, µ,n; Uo] l2
Im/ I 6w. 6µ]	(182)
This pseudo-spectrum expresses the contribution to 
response variance of the deterministic response to com­ 
ponent waves of different frequencies and directions. 
Comparing Equation (182) and Equation (72) of Section 
2.8, the relationship between the pseudo response spec­ 
trum and the directional wave spectrum becomes:
P;(w., µ)  = l,jj(w., µ,; U0  )12 S,(w., µ)	(183)


are the same. The long-crestedness assumption 
means that the direction of propagation of all wave 
compo­ nents relative to ship heading is the same, 
µ0, say, and that the waves may otherwise be 
represented by a point spectrum, S,(w). In this case 
the relationship between the variance spectrum of 
the j'th response and the wave point spectrum 
becomes:
S;(w)  =  111/w, µ,0 ;   0)12 S,(w)	(186)
The response spectrum is thus equal to the product 
of the wave point spectrum and the squared 
modulus of the transfer function (or squared RAO 
according to the present definition). It might be 
noted again that the wave direction variable, , is a 
constant parameter within the expression, and we 
have substituted  U0   =


  Though the corresponding directional wave spec­ 
trum is "observable", the pseudo-spectrum of response 
is not. Any given response  is an observable  function 
of time. We can decompose an observable time function 
into frequency components, but cannot unambiguously 
determine the direction of the wave components that 
produced each frequency component. Thus it is nec­ 
essary to define a response spectrum that is a function 
only of encounter frequency, and this may be done in 
the same manner as was done in Section 2 for the wave
point spectrum:


0 in the argument of the trans£er function.
  As has been implied by the treatment of the last 
section, the integral of the response spectrum over 
positive frequency is defined to be the response vari­ 
ance. (Variance spectra in this chapter are defined 
only for positive frequencies.) In simpler language, 
the area under the response spectrum is equal  to  the 
variance of the response. In this case, the spectral 
moments of response are defined in the same way as 
for point spectra of waves (see Section 2.6):
00



2..
5'.,-(w.) =	Piw., µ,) dµ,	(184)
0

Comparing (184), (183), (182), and (180) the response 
spectrum may be identified as a limit as 6w, _,.0:
Si(w.).,..,] _,.


mn = f w" S;(w) dw
0
and as in the case of waves:
m0 is response variance
m2 is variance of response velocity
m 4 is variance of response acceleration


(187)


{½	l,jj[(w.) mn,     µ,n; Uo] l2   I.,.,.2/    6w.} (185}
  

Period averages for response are also defined as 
in Equations (49) through (52) of Section 2.6; that 
is, the same formulas hold, with response spectral 
moments


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	87
used instead of wave spectral moments. In  practice, 
the estimates of response spectra and the moment 
integrals are done numerically; response amplitude op­ 
erators almost never are obtained in continuous and 
sufficiently simple analytical forms that might allow 
purely analytical expressions for either the spectra or 
the moments (See 4.6, example computations).
  4.3	The Long-Crested, Forward-Speed Case. As in


the last section, the waves are assumed to be long­ 
crested so that all wave components propagate in the 
same constant direction, µ,0 ,  relative  to ship heading. 
As before, we also assume that a wave point spectrum 
is   available  to  define  the  frequency   content  of the
waves. In  this case we consider  non-zero vessel speed


•
...
"'



...


(U0*  0). It  has  been  pointed  out in Section  2.8 that 
non-zero vessel speed can result in considerable com­ 
plication, and it is at this point that we resume the 
discussion started there. In order to develop the re­



fig. 66 Wave encounter spectra in long-crested head seas, at 
increasing
ship speeds


The second possibility to be considered is that of


sponse spectrum in a more practical form than  has 
been indicated in Section 4.1 we must develop the en­


head or bow waves. In this case µ0
270 deg, and cos µ


is between 90 and


countered wave spectrum in some detail. We will con­ 
sider encounter frequency to be positive always and 
write it in a slightly different form to express this:
w,  =  lw  -    (c,,2 U0/   g)  COS µ,01	(188)
  Now the transition from the wave point spectrum 
defining long-crested waves to the encountered spec­ 
trum is essentially a transformation of the frequency 
coordinate system such that the wave variance is pre­ 
served. In a similar way to the treatment of Section 
2.8, the encountered spectrum for long-crested waves 
may be written:
S,(w,; µ0 ,   U0)   = S,(w)/11 -   (2wU0/   g)  cos µ,0 I   (189)
where the value on the right-hand side must be as­ 
sociated with the proper value of w. via the transf or­ 
mation, (188). The absolute value of the denominator 
(the Jacobian of the transformation) is taken because 
spectral density (the frequency decomposition of var­ 
iance) must be positive. It may also be noted that the 
constant parameters, µ0 , U0 , have been added to the 
augment list of the encounter spectrum to emphasize 
the point that this function of encounter frequency 
depends upon the values assumed for speed and wave 
direction.
  The detailed treatment of the encountered long­ 
crested wave spectrum is dependent upon the sign of 
cos µ,0 in the transformation (188). There are effectively 
three possibilities. The first is that the wave direction 
is 90 or 270 deg; that is, the vessel is proceeding in 
beam long-crested waves. In this event, cos µ0 = 0, 
thus w, = w, and the encountere spectrum is the 
same as the wave point spectrum regardless of speed.
Thus in beam long-crested seas the relations between 
response spectra and wave spectra are the same  as 
were noted in the last sub-section, the only difference 
being that the RAO would have to be that for a wave 
direction of 90 or 270 deg.


0 is negative. In this circumstance
the expression within the absolute value signs in 
(188) is always positive. This means that the 
transformation between w, and w is one-to-one for 
all positive values of frequency, and that the 
denominator of (189) will not approach zero. Fig. 66 
illustrates schematically the influence of speed upon 
the encountered long-crested sea spectrum for head 
or bow seas. Generally, the shape of the 
encountered spectrum is similar to that of the point 
spectrum regardless of speed. The effect of the 
transformation is to shift the spectrum to higher 
frequencies and flatten it a bit, while the area 
remains constant. Now turning to the relationships 
between the wave encounter and the response 
spectrum, the response spectrum for long-crested 
head or bow waves becomes:
S/(w,) = l7jj(w., µo; U0 )12 S,(w,; µ,0 ,  Uo)	(190)
where 90      µ,0	270 deg, the transfer function is 
developed as a function of encounter frequency, 
and the transformation of the wave frequency  
spectrum is carried out as in (189). The superscript, 
H, is to call attention to the fact that the relationship 
holds only for long-crested head or bow waves.
  With the last paragraph half of the possible direc­ 
tions of long-crested waves have been dealt with. The 
other half involves quartering and following seas. In 
this  case O    µ0	90, or  270    µ,0    360 deg,  and 
cos µ,0 is positive. The resulting variation of encounter 
frequency (188) with wave frequency is shown sche­ 
matically in Fig. 67. In general, as wave frequency 
increases, encounter frequency goes through a maxi­ 
mum, returns to zero, and then increases once more. 
The figure illustrates the primary complication in the 
transformation between wave and encounter fre­ 
quency for following or quartering waves; that is, for 
any value of w. there correspond either one or three 
values of w (and one or three wave lengths). An ob­ 
server aboard ship who senses an encounter frequency


88	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



less than g I (4U0 cos ,-,.0) cannot work out the corre­ 
sponding wave frequency without additional infor­ 
mation. The wave frequency, g I ( U0 cos ), at which
(I)•  = 0 corresponds  to the situation  where the com­
ponent of ship speed in the direction of wave propa­ 
gation, ( U0 cos ,-,.0 ) , is exactly the same as the wave 
celerity, Ve. The maximum in the curve of (I)• occurs 
at (I) = g I (2 U0 cos ,-,.0 ) , and at this point the component 
of ship speed in the direction of wave propagation is 
exactly equal to the group velocity of the waves, 
Vc/2. Near this maximum there is a broad range of
wave frequencies, (I), that will produce nearly the same 
frequency of encounter.
  For the following or quartering wave case, the trans­ 
formation between encounter and wave frequency is 
multi-valued, and this must be accounted for in the 
development of the encountered spectrum. For this 
purpose the wave frequency range may be divided into 
three regions as shown in Fig. 67. In the first, the 
component of ship speed in the direction of wave ad­ 
vanee is less than the wave group velocity. In the 
second, the ship velocity component is between wave 
group velocity and celerity, and in the third, the ship 
velocity component is greater than the celerity. Phys­ 
ically, in Regions I and II the waves overtake the ship, 
and in Region III the ship overtakes the waves. Within 
each of the three regions the (I), w.transformation is 
one-to-one.
  Fig. 68 illustrates schematically what happens when 
the transformation, Equation (189), is carried out for 
quartering or following waves. The (a) part .of the 
figure indicates the wave frequency spectrum and the 
position of the three regions noted in Fig. 67. The (b) 
part of the figure indicates what happens when the 
operation defined by (189) is carried out. As (I) ap­ 
proaches g I (2U0 cos ,-,.0) the denominator of (189) goes 
to zero and the result is a singularity in the encoun­ 
tered spectrum. The area under the spectrum at this


2 Uo coy, 0	Uo cos)'0
fig. 67 Variation of encounter frequency with wave frequency/for regular 
following or quartering waves


step is not equal to the wave variance because the 
transformation is not complete. The modified spectral 
densities have not been associated with the proper 
encounter frequency, a schematic scale of which is 
included beneath part ( b) of the figure. Part (c) indi­ 
cates the association step. The contribution  of  
Region I extends from zero tow. = g I (4U0 cos ,-,.0 ) . The 
Region II contribution folds back and extends down to 
zero frequency, and the Region III contribution starts  
at zero and extends to indefinitely high encounter fre­
quency. Part (d) of the figure indicates the wave spec­ 
trum as would be sensed aboard  the moving ship. In 
the range O  w.   g / (4U0   cos ,-,.0 )   the contributions 
from  the  three  wave frequency  regions  are 
additive.
  Thus, the encountered spectrum for quartering or 
following waves can be a practically unrecognizable 
modification of the wave frequency spectrum. It is 
worth noting that if the wave spectrum  is appreciable 
at w = g I (2U0 cos ,-,.0 ) the encounter spectrum will
almost certainly have a strong peak at w. = g / (4U0
cos ,-,.0 ) . Within the range of typical ship sizes and 
speeds, the contribution of Region III tends to be un­ 
important, but there is a good possibility that both 
Regions I and II may be important for  high-speed 
ships.
  Now turning to the relation between the response 
and the encountered wave spectrum, the preceding 
discussion shows that, in order to estimate the re­ 
sponse spectrum in quartering or following waves, 
we must handle the contributions from the three 
regions of wave frequency separately. In this case 
the re­ sponse spectrum is formed by:
S/(w.) = 111/(w., ,-,.o; Uo)l2 S 1(w.; JJ,o, Uo)
+ l11/1(w., ,-,.o; Uo)l2 S 11(w.; .	U0)
+ l-ijj111( w. , ,-,.0; Uo)l2 sm(w.; ,.,.o, Uo)	(191)
where for example, S 1 (w.; ,-,.0 , U0) is the contribution 
to the wave encounter spectrum from Region I, and 
111/((1)., ,-,.o; U0 )I is the response amplitude operator 
as­ sociated with the wave frequencies of Region I. It 
should be  noted  that  the contributions from Regions 
I and II will contain singularities unless the response 
operator for (I)• = g / (4U0 cos ,-,.0 ) is zero, a relatively 
unlikely event. However, the area of the response 
spec­ trum will be finite and equal to the response 
variance. In practice, the moments of the response 
spectrum are  usually  a  more important  result than 
the response
spectrum itself. The response spectral moments are 
only meaningful in terms of encounter frequency, and 
are defined as follows:
0
0

mn =	(w.r S;(w.) dw.	(192)
0

so that once  having the response spectrum,  (190) or
(191),  the  immediate  next step is to integrate   over





 
0	g	g	W


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	89
  The 
same 
result is 
obtained 
when the 
head or 
bow sea 
response 
spectrum 
is 
substitut
ed. 
Equation 
(192) for 
the 
response 
spectral 
moments 
as an 
integral 
over 
wave 
frequenc
y thus 
holds for 
any 
speed 
and 
heading 
to long-
crested 
waves. 
No 
singulari
ties 
appear in 
the 
integran
d and 
thus the 
numeric
al work 
is 
straightf
or­ ward. 
In short, 
all 
moment 
calculati
ons can 
be c n­ 
venientl
y carried 
out in 
the wave 
frequenc
y 
domam, 
with 
knowled
ge of the 
point 
spectrum 
of 
waves, 
S,(w), 
and the 
response 
operator 
as a 
function 
of wave 
fre-


2 Uo co	Uo COSA,
                         (a)	WAVE FREQUENCY SPECTRUM



1n
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I


4 Uo co'i"\,
(c)	ASSOCIATION STEP

 


quency.	.
It may be noted that the 
integrand of Equation (193)
for n = 0 is:
111;-(w, µ,0; U0 
)12 S,(w)
This is in the form of a 
spectrum, and the integral over 
frequency (the area) is the 
response variance, but it is not 
the spectrum of response as 
would be sensed by 
instrumentation aboard a 
moving ship. Depending upon 
ship speed and wave direction, 
the frequencies and the shape 
of the integrand of (193) may 
be com­ pletely incorrect as a 
representation of an observed


0    -g--g-(0
2Uo CC>!J,'t, Uo CO-l,U0
lw.- 1- ,._ lw.­
0	0
4 Uo co7'{,
(b) FIRST TRANSFORMATION STEP


0	w.	g
4 Uo co,y,

(d)	TRANSFORMED SPECTRUM


response  spectrum.  Nevertheless,  
the  integrand of
(193) can be and is called a 
spectrum, and can be put to good 
use in practical analyses of the 
contributions of various wave 
frequencies to the response 
moments. If it is desired to work 
out the actual response spectral 
shape the wave spectrum must be 
transformed  to the


Fig. 68


Transformation of wave 
spectrum to 
encounter 
spectrum, 
following or 
quartering 
waves (long-
crest d)


encounter 
frequency 
domain, and the 
operations of
(190) or (191) 
must be carried 
out.
4.4	The Short-
Crested 
Sea Case. 
The last of 
the


encounter frequency. As mentioned previously, all 
practical work is done numerically. Because of the 
nature of the head or bow sea frequency transfor­ 
mation, numerical integration of (190) is hardly more 
difficult than in the zero speed case. However, because 
of the singularities in (191), which are brought on by 
the frequency transformation, numerical integrations 
for quartering or following waves become rather com­ 
plicated exercises. For this reason it i custo!llary_ to 
proceed in a different manner. The basic relationships 
between response variance or moments co ld have 
been developed in the wave frequency domam at the 
outset and this was done in St. Denis and Pierson 
(1953).' The frequency transformation was introduced 
in that reference only to develop the response spec­ 
trum properly. Thus, relative to the present treatmen , 
if the expression for the response spectru , (191), is 
substituted in (192), and a variance-preservmg trans­ 
formation from encounter to wave frequency is carried 
out, the expression for the moments becomes:
"'
mn = lw - (w 2 Uol u ) cos /J,ol X
0


complications  in applying  li?ear random theory	he response 
of a vessel is that mtroduced by the variation of direction of the 
wave components in a short-crested sea. In Sections 4.2 and 4.3 for 
the  long-crested  case the wave component direction was 
assumed to be a constant parameter, µ0 • In the short-crested c_ase 
t e component wave direction, µ, becomes a variable  m the same 
sense as is wave or encounter frequency. In this case we must deal 
with  waves that are defined  by a directional spectrum, S,(w, µ), 
rather than the point spectrum, S,(w). As before,  we  denote  the  
spectrum of the j th response as Si(w.), and note from t e ef­ 
inition of the variance spectrum  that  the contribution to total 
response variance of respons_e co p?nents  of all directions with 
encounter frequencies withm a small range, 6w., of some 
frequency, w., may be represented as Slw,) 6w,.	.
According to the simplified treatment of Section 4.1
we may think of Siw,) 6w. as the sum of all the o ­ tributions to 
variance of the response to all the md1- vidual directional 
wave components that produce a response with frequency very 
_near w,. The i dic3:ted summation in Equation (184) 1s over 
wave direction, and we must thus anticipate that the response 
spec­ trum for short-crested seas will involve an integral over 
wave direction of the form:


90	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


f l7jj(w., µ,; U 0 )12 S,(w., µ,) dµ,
where S,(w., µ,) is the result of transforming the wave 
directional spectrum into the encounter frequency do­ 
main. All the complications noted in the last section 
for long-crested waves enter into the transformation 
of the directional spectrum. Since the wave direction 
is a variable rather than a constant parameter, the 
boundaries of the various "regions" described in the 
last section become functions of encounter frequency 
as well as direction. Because of this, the response spec­
trum  is  not the straightforward direction  integral of



circumstance that the directional 
spectrum may be rep­ resented as the 
product of a point spectrum and a 
spreading function, M(µ,),
S,(w, µ,) -+ S,(w) M(µ)
As noted in Section 2.6, this is of 
practical influence in design application 
because of the dearth of infor­ mation 
on directional wave spectra. It is easily 
seen that if this representation is 
substituted into (194), the computation 
of moments in short-crested seas may be 
split into two operations:


(190) or (191) that the form just noted might imply. 
However, the general form of  the  response  spectrum 
is superficially similar to that for the long-crested case 
in that it may be written in the form:
Siw,) = S/(w.) + S/(w.) + S/1{w.) + S]11(w,)





where:


mn  =f

00


2...



0



m(n, µ,) M(µ,) dµ,	(195)



The first contribution is essentially that from wave 
directions corresponding to head and bow seas, and 
the second through fourth the contributions from the 
ambiguous quartering and following sea regions of 
the ro, w. transformation. Each of these contributions 
is an integral over wave direction, each with very pre­ 
cise, and different, domains of integration. As a prac­ 
tical matter, the complications are such that estimates 
of the response spectrum in short-crested seas are 
virtually never done, and the interested reader is re­ 
ferred to St. Denis and Pierson (1953), or Price and 
Bishop (1974) for further details.
  As in the long-crested case, spectral moments are 
of more practical interest than the details of the form 
of the response spectrum. Thus it is fortunate that it 
is possible to substitute the detailed expression for the 
response spectrum in short-crested seas into the gen­ 
eral expression for spectral moments. Equation (192) 
makes a variance-preserving transformation from the 
encounter to the wave frequency domain, and arrive 
at an expression that allows all moment calculations 
to be carried out in the wave frequency-direction do­ 
main. The resulting expression for the spectral mo­ 
ments is:
00 2,r
mn = Jw - (w 2 U0/ g) COS µ,Jn
0 0
l7jj(w, µ,; U 0 )12 S,(w, µ,) dµ, dw	(194)


m(n, µ)  =f lw  -   (w 2U0/   g) cos µJn  X
0
J7jj(w, µ; U 0 )12 S,(w) dw	(196)
the function m(n, µ), (196), is simply 
the n'th spectral moment in long-crested 
seas as a function of the wave direction, 
µ,. The n'th moment in short-crested 
seas involves weighting the long-crested 
moments with the spreading function 
(See example in Subsection 4.6).
  4.5	Statistics of Maxima. The shape of 
the spec­ trum of a vessel's response 
tells the analyst what fre­ quencies are 
important contributors to the response 
variance. Thus the response spectrum 
may allow in­ ferences to be made 
about why a response variance is what it 
turned out to be, or perhaps (indirectly)  
how a vessel might be modified for 
better performance. However, in 
practice the most important result of the 
theory described previously is the 
response variance (the zero'th spectral 
moment, or spectrum area) be­ cause 
this quantity is central to all the 
measures of response magnitude that 
are considered useful in de­ sign 
application.
  In the marine field it is customary to 
estimate mag­ nitudes of response in 
terms of quantities that have some 
connection with the qualitative aspects of 
waves or response to waves (visible 
crests, troughs, ampli­ tudes, etc.). 
Mechanically, such estimates are made 
by multiplying the square root of 
response variance (the RMS response) by 
a constant that is derived from the theory 
for the probability density of the maxima 
of a


As before, the expression holds regardless of speed 
and wave direction, and is free of singularities. The 
integrand is essentially that of Equation (193) and is 
thus not a proper response spectrum because it is not 
based on w,. The main difference between this and
(193) for the long-crested case is that the wave direc­ 
tion is a variable.
  There is a manipulation of very practical significance 
that may be done to Equation (194) under the special


stationary zero-mean Gaussian random 
process. The applicable probability theory 
was summarized in Sec­ tion 2 for ocean 
waves and is applicable to the response if, 
as we have assumed here, the wave 
processes are Gaussian, and the response 
is linear. Hence, it may be assumed that 
all of the formulas and constants pre­ 
sented in Section 2 for wave heights 
apply to response double amplitudes. 
Since amplitudes, rather than heights or 
double amplitudes, are usually of more 
in-


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	91



terest for response,  all the height constants  presented 
in Section 2 should be multiplied by ½, Hence,
Average  response  amplitude = 1.25	mo
Significant  response amplitude  =	2.0	mo
Average of ½o highest
response  amplitudes = 2.55	mo
  The greatest response amplitude expected on the 
average in samples of size (N) of independent obser­ 
vations of apparent response amplitudes are
N = 100,	3.25	mo
N = 1000,	3.85	mo
N = 10,000,	4.45	mo
However, if a large number of samples of the stated 
size are taken, five percent of them would be expected 
to contain maximum amplitudes exceeding:



resents the largest positive maximum in a sample con­ 
taining n positive maxima,  and  that  En  =  mo 
represents this sample extreme in non-dimensional 
form. Further, define an estimated non-dimensional 
extreme for samples of n maxima as :§:n· The confi­ 
dence level is defined by a probability  statement  that 
is valid before the data are collected:

where a is a "small" probability chosen to reflect the 
desired degree of confidence that the estimated ex­ 
treme value will not be exceeded in one sample. If the 
value of a is chosen to be 0.01 for instance, and a 
value of :§:n estimated, the actual extreme in each of 
many samples of n maxima should exceed :§:n only 
once on average in 100 such samples. Broadly, the 
development of Ochi (1973) involves estimates of 
extremes in which there is an 100(1 - a) percent 
confidence that the


N  = 100,
N = 1000,


3.9	mo
4.45   mo


actual 
extreme in 
a sample 
of n 
maxima 
will not 
exceed 
the 
estimate.
The 
develop
ment of 
Ochi 
(1973) 
continue
d by 
devel­


The above involves the concept of confidence level.
  We may note that response spectra are generally 
narrower than wave spectra. Thus the narrow-band 
assumption normally applied to wave statistics (and to 
derive the numbers just given) is usually even more 
appropriate for responses. To restate the magnitude 
of the theoretical error introduced by the narrow-band 
assumption, for most response cases of interest the 
spectral broadness parameter, e is less. than 0.6, and 
Fig. 32 (Section 2.6) shows, for example, that assuming 
e = 0 leads to an error in the significant amplitude 
estimate of only about 5 percent. However, it should 
be noted that there are types of ship response in which 
the spectral broadness parameter can be greater than 
0.6, and the conventions and numbers just given may 
be improper. The most common case is associated with 
the stress response of ships. Strong vibratory stress 
fluctuations can superimpose upon wave induced 
stresses in a way that produces double peaked re­ 
sponse spectra which may be "broad" in the sense 
defined by the probability theory.
  Since there are occasions when it is important to 
estimate extreme response magnitudes when response 
spectra are broad, a useful extension of the extreme 
value theory for the maxima was made by Ochi (1973). 
As was noted in Section 2.6, when the spectrum of a 
zero-mean process is broad, we have maxima that are 
negative and minima that are positive. However, these 
are of virtually no engineering interest if, as is com­ 
mon, we are interested in the possibility that some pre­ 
determined response amplitude might be exceeded. 
Thus Ochi (1973) derived the probability density of 
positive maxima (or negative minima) for processes 
with arbitrary broadness. In order to apply extreme 
value theory properly it is necessary first to define the 
level of confidence in the result. Suppose that rep-


oping a relatively simple formula for :§:n from the 
density function for positive maxima previously men­ 
tioned. This led to the recognition that the number of 
observed maxima of interest, n, could  be  related  to 
the duration of the observation of the process from 
which the positive maxima were derived if it be as­ 
sumed that successive positive maxima are statistically 
independent. The final relatively simple result for the 
estimation of extreme positive maxima (or extreme 
negative minima) became:

where :§:D is the estimated non-dimensional extreme 
that should be exceeded only once on average in 1 / a 
samples of D seconds duration. The second form of 
Equation (197) follows from the definition of the zero 
crossing period, T., in Section 2.6, and it may be illu­ 
minating to note that D IT, is equal to the expected 
number of zero up-crossings in duration, D. More or 
less coincidentally, (197) is the same as the answer 
obtained when Ochi's assumptions are applied to the 
case of an ideally narrow band process. It must  be 
noted that (197) holds for small values of a and for 
values of spectral broadness parameter less than 0.9; 
that is for the vast majority of cases of practical in­ 
terest. On the other hand, the necessary  assumption 
that successive positive maxima be statistically inde­ 
pendent is likely only to be true for  processes  with 
very broad spectra; that is, the assumption is normally 
violated for responses of interest. However, the effect 
of this violation is to inject some conservatism into the 
result in that (197) should usually yield answers larger 
than would be the case if statistical independence of 
successive maxima were considered rigorously. Due


92	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



to the sluggish numerical behavior of the square root 
of a logarithm, this conservatism is likely to amount 
to less than 10 percent, even for responses that are 
quite narrow band.
  To take a simple example of practical application, 
suppose that the variance, m0 , of heave and the var­ 
iance of heave velocity, m2 , are computed from a re­ 
sponse spectrum to be


8 and 9 are formed by successive multiplications 
with the square of encounter frequency, Column 2. 
These last operations result in Simpson's functions 
of ordi­ nates for the second and fourth spectral 
moments, m 2 and m,. After summing Columns 7, 8 
and 9, the three
moments are worked out as indicated in the lower part 
of the table.
In setting up such computations it is clearly impor­


m0 = 4 (m)2


tant to select 
wave 
frequency 
increments 
so as to de­ 
fine 
reasonably 
well both the 
peak of the 
spectrum 
and


m2 = 1 (m/ sec)2
and assume that we wish to estimate an extreme heave 
amplitude that we are 99 percent confident will not be 
exceeded in 24 hours of statistically steady response. 
The duration, D, becomes 86,400 seconds, a is 0.01, 
and substituting into (197) the result is: :§: n = 5.18. 
This is the non-dimensional extreme. The dimensional 
extreme is obtained by multiplying  by -.[in;, so that 
the estimated extreme heave amplitude in a 24-hour 
exposure becomes 10.36 m, with 99 percent confidence. 
For comparison, from the previous discussion the ex­
pected average  of  the ½0  highest amplitudes  for  this
case would be 5.1 m.
  4.6	Example Computations. By comparison with the 
theoretical determinations of response functions, Sec­ 
tion 3, the computation of response moments is quite 
straightforward, as is the computation of response 
spectra,  so long as  short-crested  following seas are
not  involved.  Such  computations  are  ordinarily done


the peaks of the response operator. In some cases 
plots of the integrand may be required in order  to 
confirm the adequacy of this choice. In this 
connection it might be noted that the extra work of 
Simpson's integrations is not absolutely required. In 
the example the simpler trapezoidal integration of 
Column 5 yields an answer only 0.8 percent different 
from that given in the table for m0 • The usual 
precision of the determination of response operators 
seldom justifies highly precise spectral moment 
integrations.
  Computations such as outlined in Table 15 are in­ 
herently dimensional since the wave point  spectrum 
and the wave frequency are dimensional. In the ex­ 
ample the RAO happens  to be  non-dimensional since 
it is that for heave. It is important to note that if the 
example had involved pitch or roll response,  the units 
of the RAO would have been degrees per meter and 
thus the units of Column 5 would have been deg;-sec, 
and those of the moments would have been deg2 (deg/


on the computer to save time, but the more important 
ones can be done by hand, and will be illustrated here 
in forms that can be used for hand calculation.
  As has been noted, the computation of spectral mo­ 
ments for the long-crested case is the basic operation, 
and a typical such hand calculation is illustrated in 
Table 15. The objective of the computation is to esti­ 
mate the first three even spectral moments for one 
response to one long-crested wave system in accor­ 
dance with Equation (193). If more than one response 
or more than one wave system is at issue, the com­ 
putation is repeated with as many combinations of


sec)2, and (deg/ sec2 2
  The usual next step after the moments have been 
obtained is to compute the statistical averages of in­ 
terest. For example:

  Average period between zero-up crossings of 
response:
     T,  = 2w  m0/   m 2   = 9.49 sec 
Average period between response maxima:
Tc = 2w  m2  I  m  4  = 8.86 sec


response and wave data as are required.
  In the evaluation of (193) it is convenient to define 
both the response operator and the wave point spec­ 
trum at uniform increments of wave frequency, Col­ 
umn 1. In the table Column 3 reflects a heave response 
operator (RAO) typical of a ship proceeding in bow 
seas (µ, = 157.5 deg) at a Froude number of 0.2. For 
the example the ship was assumed to be 500 ft (152.4
m)  in  length  so  that  speed,  U0 ,   is 15.05  knots.  This 
yields encounter frequencies, Column 2, according  to 
Ct>0 = Ct> + 0.7294 Ct> The wave point spectrum, Column


Spectral broadness parameter:
E  =	1 - (TJ T,)2 = 0.36
(so that the heave is relatively narrow-band.)
Significant amplitude estimates become:
Significant heave amplitude = 2 ,Jm;, = 2.30 m. 
Significant amplitude of heave velocity
                    = 2 ..{m;. = 1.52 m/sec 
Significant amplitude of heave acceleration
=  2	= 1.08 m/ sec 2 = 0.11 g


4, was taken to be in the 15th ITTC form (Section 
2.llb), with T1  at 10.8 seconds  and a significant height 
of 5 m (16 ft). Ordinates of the integrand of Equation 
(193), Column 5, are the product of Column 4 and the 
square of Column 3. Columns 6 and 7 indicate the usual 
steps in a Simpson's integration of Column 5. Columns


Significant heave double amplitude
= 2(2.3) = 4.6 m.
Considering other measures of response:
Average of the ½oth highest heave
amplitudes = 2.55 Jm;, = 2.94 m.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	93

Table 15-Example Computation of Heave Spectral Moments, Long-Crested Seas
CD	®	®	©	®	©	0	_©	®
cu	cu.	RAO  Sg(cu)  @2  x ©	@x©	(DX   @2	© x ®2
rad/sec  rad/sec  m/m  m2-sec    m2-sec    SM	m2-sec	m / se c	m2/ sec8




















0
l: = 79.625 l: = 34.872 l: = 17.549
m0  =  0.  5  X  79.625 =  1.3271  m2




m2 =


0.05  X  34.872  = 0.5812( mI.  sec.)2



m4 = 0   5  x 17.549  =   0.2925 (m./ sec2)2



Greatest heave amplitude expected on 
the average in 1000 oscillations
= 3.85 -/mo = 4.44 m.
The extreme heave amplitude that should not be ex­ 
ceeded in 24 hr exposure with confidence of 99 percent 
would be computed from Equation (197) as follows:

86,400 ]
D =	2  ln  (0. 0l   }(9.49)	=  5.24
thus the extreme sought equals 5.24-/mo = 6.04 m. 
Typical computations of response moments in short­
crested seas are of course more involved since heading 
is a variable rather than a constant parameter. How­ 
ever, the usual objective is the same as in the long­ 
crested case; that is, to estimate spectral moments, 
which are used in the same way as in the preceding 
long-crested example. If the directional wave spec­ 
trum, S,(w, µ), is given as a general numerical function 
of wave frequency and direction, then the computation


would involve double integrations of the form of (194). 
At present, not enough detailed engineering data are 
available to define the directional spectrum this way, 
and virtually all computations of response to short 
crested seas have involved the approximation that the 
directional wave spectrum is the product of a point 
spectrum and a spreading function. Accordingly, the 
present illustration of short-crested computations will 
be confined to the approach indicated by (195) and 
(196). To illustrate, the cosine-squared spreading 
function noted in Section 2.6 will be assumed, and the 
angular
spread taken to be plus or minus 90 degrees. Thus:
M(µw) = -2 cos2(µw)
1
T

where -90   deg :$;  /J,w  :$;  90 deg
and /J-w is the angle between a wave component and 
the dominant wave direction. The usual way to 
perform the   numerical   integrations   over   wave  
direction re-


94	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



Table 16-Derivation of Spreading Function Weights for
22.5 deg Heading Intervals


mn = L m(n,j6µ) W(j6µ)	(198)
j





(µw) =




s 6µ  X  2   
X@	eg.



W(j6µ), for a 
wave direction 
increment of 22½ 
deg.






22.5






6µ = 22.5 deg = 0.3927 radians
½ 6µ = 0.1309
Note: Function, W(µ,.) is zero outside the directional range 
shown.

quired by (195) is to choose an even divisor of 90 de­ 
grees as the wave direction increment and apply 
Simpson's rule. Essentially, the expression is turned 
into a weighted sum, in which the spreading function, 
M(µ..), weighted by Simpson's rule is designated 
W(j6µ). Then:


tation is to evaluate the long-crested spectral 
moments of interest as functions of 
component wave direction,
µ, relative to the ship's heading, as indicated 
in (196). If "around the clock" results are 
desired and the spreading function 
integration is to be performed with 22½ deg 
intervals, as assumed for Table 16, Equation
(196) would be evaluated forµ = 0, 22.5, ... 180 deg.
Each of these computations is the same as 
those shown in Table 15. The results of the 
long-crested computa­ tions for pitching may 
be arranged as in the first two columns of 
Table 17. Because  phase relations are lost in a 
variance computation, and ships are ordinarily




Table 17-Example Computation of Zeroth Spectral Moment for Pitching in Short-Crested Seas, Using the Wave Spreading 
Funct(on Weights of Table 16
 	µ,, = o·		µ,, = 157.5°


0	®	0- ® µ,,	©	®
µ ..  = µ -   µ,,	w


0- ® µ,,	0	®
µ..  = µ -   µ,,	w


µ deg	m(0, µ)	deg	(µw)	@X©	deg	(µ..)	@ X0
0	0.61	0	0.1667	0.1017	202.5	0	0
22.5	0.65	22.5	0.2845	0.1849	225.0	0	0
45.0	0.65	45.0	0.0833	0.0541	247.5	0	0
67.5	0.36	67.5	0.0488	0.0176	270.0	0	0
90.0	0.03	90.0	0.0000	0	292.5	0.0488	0.0015
112.5	0.79	112.5	0.0000	0	315.0	0.0833	0.0658
135.0	1.99	135.0	0.0000	0	337.5	0.2845	0.5661
157.5	2.28	157.5	0.0000	0	0	0.1667	0.3801
180.0	2.21	180.0	0.0000	0	22.5	0.2845	0.6287
202.5	2.28	202.5	0.0000	0	45.0	0.0833	0.1899
225.0	1.99	275.0	0.0000	0	67.5	0.0488	0.0971
247.5	0.79	247.5	0.0000	0	90.0	0	0
270.0	0.03	270.0	0.000	0	112.5	0	0
292.5	0.36	292.5	0.0488	0.0176	135.0	0	0
315.0	0.65	315.0	0.0833	0.0541	157.5	0	0
337.5	0.65	337.5	0.2845	0.1849	180.0	0	 	0
l:  = 0.6149	l:   = 1.9292
m0  for ship heading  to dom. wave dir. 0 deg  =  0.6149 deg2
M0     for ship  heading to dom.  wave dir. 157.5 deg  = 1.9292 deg2

Note: The zeroth moment (area) results were obtained for the pitch response of a ship 175 m in len h at 22 knots by 
repeated application of the method illustrated in Table 15. The same 5 m (16 ft) sea spectrum 1s used as in Table 
15.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	95


,- .... _





'	I
'	I



  4.7	Synthesis  of  Ship  Response  to   Irregular 
Seas. The theory outlined in the preceding subsec­ 
tions holds for any linear ship response to random 
waves, and for this reason it was convenient there not 
to go into details about particular responses. The intent 
in this sub-section is to illustrate the implications of 
the theory for specific vessel responses, mainly for the 
important case of pitch and heave in head seas.
  (a) Heave in irregular waves. It was noted in Sec­ 
tion 3.7 that one of the fundamental things to keep in 
mind when analyzing heave response to regular waves 
is that the non-dimensional response  is  always  unity at 
zero wave frequency, and tends to zero at very high


0 '--'--'--, 	.       .       .       .      '....'.,."._.,,      ,	 ,      ........,_,_ . 	.
0	30	60	90	120	150	180
DOMINANT WAVE DIRECTION ,)',,.

Fig. 69 Comparison of pitch variances computed for long and short-crested
waves


symmetric about the center-plane, spectral  moments 
for wave directions (360µ.) deg are the same as for 
wave direction µ.. Thus the numbers entered in Column
2 for directions greater than 180 deg are just a re­ 
flection of the computed results about µ. = 180 deg. 
Note  that  the  wave  point  spectrum  is  assumed con­
stant for all the long-crested computations.
Next, the relationship between the wave direction,
µ.w, and the wave direction, µ., must be clarified. The 
spreading function  angles are defined with  respect  to 
a dominant wave direction, which in turn may be de­ 
fined relative to the ship's heading as µ. • Thus the


frequencies. As wave frequency approaches zero the wave 
length approaches infinity and the ship follows the wave 
surface, so that heave and wave amplitudes are equal. On 
the other hand, as wave frequency in­ creases, wave 
lengths ultimately become very small; that is, become 
ripples to which ships and platforms do not respond.
  Fig. 70 illustrates the typical shape of a ship heave 
response operator at fixed forward speed (Fn :::::: 0.15) in 
head seas. Usually the operator is very  near  unity for an 
appreciable range  of  wave  frequency  starting at zero. There 
is often an apparent  resonance  peak, and then a decline to 
zero. For ships at  moderate speeds in head seas the range of  
frequencies  where this transition is defined usually 
corresponds to a var-


WAVE LENGTH, m


direction of a wave component relative to the ship's 
heading may be written:
µ. = µ.a + µ.w


0.5
0.4


1000 500 300 200 150  100	75

(a)	WAVE SPECTRA, H,,.. = 1.0


50	40


and: µ.w = µ  -   µ.0
This last relationship provides the connection between
0


_,®	r_®
I	'-	  

,	............



----


17. In the table, computations for dominant wave di­ 
rections of O and 157.5 deg are indicated. Columns 3 
and 6 indicate the values of  /J,w implied by µ0     and µ. in


0
=?._ 0.0
:i'1.0



0.2	0.6
w



0.8


a zero-to-360 deg convention. Now given µ.w the func­ 
tion W(µ.w) is entered in the appropriate places in accor­ 
dance with the results in Table 16, noting that the



.!f0.5


)RESPONSE OPERATOR
Fn"" 0.15


weights  are  zero outside  the  range -90   deg	/J-w


0.0
3


0.2	0.4 w 0.6


1.0


1.2


90 deg. The computation for the zero'th moments are 
completed by forming the products of Columns 2 and 
4, and Columns 2 and 7, and summing the results.
  Fig. 69 compares graphically the pitch variance, m0 , 
obtained by performing the operations of Table 17 for 
dominant wave directions between zero and 180 deg 
with the original long-crested estimates. The effect 
upon variance of using the cosine-squared spreading


J-0,5
°30.4
0.3
3
;;;0.2
"j  0.1




(c) RESPONSE "SPECTRA"


function of Table 16 to estimate response in short­ 
crested waves is usually as shown; that is, humps and


0.0


0.2


0.4	0.6	0.8
WAVE FREQUENCY,w


1.0


1.2


hollows in the curve of long-crested variance vs. dom­ 
inant wave direction tend to be smoothed out.


Fig. 70


Heave response in long-crested irregular head waves, with various
wave spectra


96	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 

iation in wave length from 0.5 to 2.0 ship lengths. It 
should be noted that, though the heave response op- 
erators for all floating vessels involve a transition from 
unity to zero as wave frequency increases, the quali- 
tative nature of the transition shown in Fig. 70 is not 
universal. For example, the  heave  response  operator 
of a semi-submerged offshore platform may have a 
series of undulations  in the  high-frequency  part,  and 
a more pronounced peak. Unusually strong hydrostatic 
or dynamic coupling between heave and pitch of a 
vessel can produce either a "notch" or an accentuation 
of heave response  in the  vicinity of  pitch  resonance. 
A method of plotting data to identify the resonance 
peaks of both heave and pitch is in Section 8.
  Fig. 70 has been prepared to illustrate heaving re- 
sponse of a ship heading into long-crested irregular 
waves. At the top of the figure are shown three wave 
point-spectra of the Bretschneider form (Section 2.11), 
having three different modal periods. The product of 
each of these spectra and the square of the response 
operator is shown at the bottom. Strictly, these prod- 
ucts are the integrand of Equation (193)for the heave 
variance. It has been pointed out in Section  4.3 that 
such functions of wave frequency may be called heave 
response spectra though they do not reflect the con- 
tributions of various encounter frequencies to vari- 
ance, and for present purposes this convention will be 
followed. For each of these heave "spectra", estimates 
of the significant heave double amplitude (4 times the 
square root of spectral area) are shown in the figure.


Considering the results corresponding to Spectrum 1, 
the important range  of wave frequencies  corresponds 
to the range where the response operator is essentially 
unity, the heave and wave spectra are almost identical, 
and the significant heave double amplitude is the 
same as the significant wave height. Generally, the 
signifi- cant heave double amplitude of a vessel in a 
wave system where most of the wave components are 
much longer than the vessel is about the same as the 
sig- nificant wave height. Spectrum 2 in the figure 
extends over the transition in the heave response 
operator. In this case the shape of the heave response 
spectrum is unlike that of the wave, though the 
significant heave double amplitude is almost as great 
as the significant wave height. Had the resonant peak 
of the RAO been higher, the heave response could 
have been much higher. Finally, only the high-
frequency end of the response operator overlaps the 
low-frequency tail of Spectrum 3, with the result  that  
the  significant heave is much reduced. Ultimately, as 
the significant wave frequency range is moved higher 
relative to the re- sponse operator transition, the  
significant heave  goes to zero because all wave 
components are relatively short. Ships and platforms 
do not respond to irregular ripples either.
  Fig. 71 illustrates the same things from a slightly 
different point of view. Here one wave spectrum is 
shown in relation to three response operators. The 
response operators are typical of three geometrically 
similar ships whose heave resonant frequencies differ 
by factors of two, and whose lengths thus differ by




MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	97



factors of four. The heave spectrum for the very small 
ship (No. 1) is nearly the same as the wave spectrum, 
and the significant heave double amplitude will thus 
be nearly the same as the significant wave height. The 
largest ship (No. 3), which would be sixteen times 
longer than ship No. 1, will have a relatively low heave 
response because most of the components of the ir­ 
regular wave are of higher frequency than the range 
for significant heave response. This last condition cor­ 
responds to what is called supercritical heave re­ 
sponse.
  (b)	Pitch in irregular waves. In principle, the 
analysis of pitching response to irregular long-crested 
head seas follows that for heave, except that the pitch 
response operator has different asymptotic properties. 
As with heave, pitch amplitude per unit wave ampli­ 
tude approaches zero when wave frequency grows to 
the point that the corresponding wave length is small 
relative to vessel dimensions. However, as wave fre­ 
quency approaches zero, wave length approaches in­ 
finity, the pitch of the vessel is controlled by 
hydrostatics, and the vessel follows the wave slope. 
Thus pitch amplitude per unit wave slope tends to unity 
for small wave frequency. For waves of amplitude 7f
th amplitude of wave slope (or "maximum" slope) is



Similarly, the pitch response amplitude operator is di­ 
mensional (units of degrees per ft) and so must be 
scaled for different ship sizes inversely to the scale 
ratio. Thus the peak of the squared pitch response 
operator for the 250 ft ship is about four times the 
magnitude of  that for  the 500 ft  ship. In this example 
it may be noted that the peak  of  the  wave spectrum 
has little obvious effect upon  the  results  because  of 
its position on the frequency scale; that is, the wave 
spectrum peaks at a frequency where neither response 
operator is too significant. Under the circumstances 
indicated the larger pitch response of the smaller ship 
comes about because it responds not only to the long 
waves that affect the larger ship, but to the short (high 
frequency) components as well.
  It is often helpful in the analysis of comparative 
response, such as that shown in Fig. 72, to consider 
the excitation and the response operators from the 
point of view of wave slope, as in Section 2.7. 
Whatever equivalent representation is considered, 
the pitch var­ iance must be the same, and from (193) 
we may write (and manipulate) the pitch variance in 
long-crested waves as follows:
"'


kt = c,,2t I g for deep water. Thus, pitch amplitude per 
unit wave amplitude tends to k = w2 I g;  that is, to 
zero as wave frequency tends to zero.
  Fig. 72 illustrates typical pitching response spectra 
for head long-crested waves, calculated according to 
the relation, Equation (190), for two geometrically sim­ 
ilar ships at Froude Number 0.15. It should be em­ 
phasized that the calculations have been made in the 
encounter frequency domain. Accordingly, the single 
wave-frequency spectrum for which predictions are 
being made in the figure has been transformed into


mo =


=


=


\715 (<.tl, /J,o Uo)\2 S,(w)dw
0
J 17fs(W,  /J,o Uo)/ k\2  (w4  I g2) s,.(w) dw	(199)
0

"'
17fs(W,  /J,o Uo)I k\2  s,.(w) dw
0


two encounter spectra by means of (189), one for each 
of the two absolute ship speeds. The response opera­ 
tors in Fig. 72 are plotted in squared form, a curve 
for each of the two ships, and the resulting pitch re­ 
sponse spectrum for each ship size is shown in the 
lower part of the figure. Clearly in this case the av­ 
erage pitch response of the 250-ft ship is greater than 
that of the 500-ft ship because the RAO for the 250- 
ft ship is greater and covers a greater frequency range 
than does that of the 500-ft ship.
  We note that the pitch amplitude per unit wave-slope 
amplitude for geometrically similar ships is the same 
for equal Froude numbers, and equal ratios of ship 
length to wave length. The large differences in re­ 
sponse operator magnitude shown in Fig. 72 are  a 
result of the scaling necessary to make predictions for 
the same absolute sea. When the size of the ship is 
changed the scale of frequency varies inversely  with 
the square root of the linear scale  ratio. Thus  in  Fig. 
72 the frequency of peak pitch response and the range 
of frequency for significant response of the 250 ft ship 
is roughly greater than that of the 500 ft ship.


where the expressions have been specialized to pitch
by choosing the subscript 5 in the response operator, 
l7f5 (w, µ 0;   U0 ) \.  The first of the three forms is the same 
as (193). The second is derived from the first by mul­ 
tiplying and dividing the integrand by the square of 
wave number, k, and to obtain the third form we set 
s,.(w) = (w4 I g2) S,(w) from Equation (67), Section 
2.7, where s,.(w) is the slope spectrum; that is, the 
spec­ trum of  the slopes  of  the long-crested  wave 
system. In   the   third   form  of  the  variance  
equation  above,
\7f5 (w, µ0;   U0) /   kl is the pitch amplitude  per unit wave 
slope; that  is, the  pitch  response  operator  referred to
wave slope. In this form the pitch RAO is nondimen­ 
sional, and has the same low frequency asymptotic 
properties as heave. From the equations,  the  product 
of the slope spectrum and the squared nondimensional 
pitch RAO in the third of Equations (199) defines a 
pitch response spectrum equal to that implied by the 
first. As before, this spectrum is the same as that 
which would be sensed aboard a ship only if the speed 
were zero, but can be used to advantage for  any  
speed  in aid  of  analyses  such  as  the  present.  (If   
desired, the


98	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

formation to the wave slope basis in Fig. 73 reduces 
the disparity, but does not eliminate it because the 
wave frequency scale is still dimensional. To make the 
response operator curves have the same shape for


½
u,

0	0.2

" 1.0
0
:::,

.





1.0	1.2




L = 75m
(250FT)


geometricall
y similar 
ships it is an 
advantage to 
plot them on 
the basis of 
In w, the 
natural 
logarithm of 
w, instead of 
w. Under 
this 
transformati
on RAO 
curves for 
geometricall
y similar 
ships are 
identical in 
shape, but 
are shifted 
along the In 
w scale in 
accordance 
with their 
size. This 
fact leads to 
a further 
transformati
on of the 
slope 
spectrum 
described in 
Section 2.7; 
that is, to the 
log-slope 
form, (ln w). 
The 
transformati
on is 
variance-
preserving, 
and it may 
be shown 
that:

00



(c)	RESPONSE 
SPECTRA
g


mo  =	l'ifs(ln w,  
1-"o  U 0 )! kl2 s,.(ln 
w) d(In w)	(200)




,c
u,



0	0.2	0.6
w


L = 75m
(250FT)



1.2


which is to say that the area 
of the curve formed by  a 
plot vs. ln w of the product of 
the squared RAO and the 
log-slope spectrum is equal 
to the response vari­ ance, 
and thus that this product 
defines a response spectrum 
that may be interpreted in the 
same way as the others 
previously described.


Fig. 73 Slope spectrum representation of pitching response to irregular head 
sea


slope spectrum for long-crested seas can be trans­ 
formed into the encounter domain in the same way as 
was shown for wave elevation spectra in Se.ction 4.1). 
Fig. 73 shows the prediction  of pitching  response for 
the two geometrically similar ships of Fig. 72 using 
wave slope instead of elevation spectra. Note that the 
work in Fig. 72 was done in the encounter frequency 
domain, while Fig. 73 is in the wave frequency domain. 
However, the final plots of pitch response spectra look 
very similar, and would have been identical had both 
analyses been in the same frequency domain. An ad­ 
vantage of the slope spectrum way of looking at the 
problem is that it gives a better idea of the relative 
importance of the different wave spectral components 
for responses that depend upon wave slope. In partic­ 
ular in accordance with the discussion  of Section 2.7, it 
may be noted that the spectral peak of Fig. 72 has been 
deemphasized, and that the largest contributions to the 
wave slope variance are in the high frequency range. In 
the figure the relative pitch response for the two ships is 
as before. We may amplify the reason for the much 
larger response of the smaller ship by noting that though 
the magnitude of the RAO referred  to wave slope is the 
same for the two ship sizes, the smaller ship also 
responds to a wave frequency range
where the wave slopes are greater.
  As noted previously, the RAO curves in Fig. 72 for 
geometrically similar ships of differing size differ con­ 
siderably in shape because both the wave frequency 
scale and the RAO itself are dimensional. The trans-
  

Fig. 74 indicates the prediction in the log-slope 
form of the pitching response for the two 
geometrically sim­ ilar ships of Figs. 72 and 73. The 
wave spectrum in log-slope form is shown  at  the top 
of  the figure,  and it should be noted that the log-
frequency range of general interest is negative in sign, 
and that  short waves are to the left. For later use a  
constant  log­ slope spectrum has been added. In this 
form the RAO curves for the different sized ships are 
identical in shape, but are shifted horizontally. The 
horizontal shift along  the ln w  scale  depends  upon  
the scale  ratio be­
tween  the ship dimensions  and in this case is In	=
0.347. The plot at the bottom of  the figure  indicates 
the response spectra formed for the two ships of dif­ 
fering size, calculated both for the log-slope spectrum 
corresponding to the slope spectrum of Fig. 73 and the 
constant log-slope spectrum indicated in the figure. If 
all the components of the sea had the same relative 
slope; that is, if the log-slope spectrum spectrum  
were a horizontal straight line, the response spectra 
for geometrically similar ships would have identical 
shapes, as do the RAO's. For actual ocean-wave pat­ 
terns this is not the case, and therefore the response 
spectra for similar ships of different size are also dif­ 
ferent, as shown in Fig. 74.
  Comparing the magnitude of the pitching 
responses as measured by the spectral areas in Fig. 
74 we see as before that the shape of the sea 
spectrum has less effect upon the result than does 
ship size, for even if the log-slope spectrum were a 
horizontal line (equal slope for all components) 
there would be but little difference in response at 
negative values of In w greater than -0.6. Hence, the 
larger pitching response of the small ship results 
almost entirely from its


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	99


smaller size-as indicated by the horizontal separation 
of the response spectrum curves-which adds the 
shaded area, Fig. 74 to the variance. However, in the 
case of a heavy swell, with most of the energy in long 
wave components, a situation might arise which was 
more favorable to the pitch response of the small ship. 
Since we have just finished considering the effect of 
ship size on pitching response with three different rep­ 
resentations of wave excitation spectra, it is probably 
worthwhile to consider the choice between the three 
approaches. As far as prediction of spectral moments 
is concerned, integrations similar to those indicated in 
Section 4.2 may be, and have been done, using the 
wave, the wave slope and the log-slope representa­ 
tions. The choice is largely a matter of what is wanted. 
If it is desired to clarify and separate the effects of 
ship size and wave spectral shape upon response (the 
intent in the immediately preceding paragraphs) the 
slope and log-slope approaches have much to recom­ 
mend them. These approaches work particularly well 
with responses that are naturally dependent upon 
wave slope, such as pitch and roll, and make engi­ 
neering sense with accelerations (to be discussed) and 
bending moments (Chapter IV, Vol. I). These ap-
WAVE LENGTH, FT.



proaches have little value in clarifying heave-related 
responses because such responses are not naturally 
dependent upon wave slope. On the other hand, if pre­ 
dictions of variances for a given set of sea conditions 
and responses is wanted, and as  is  usually  the case, 
the details of the spectral shapes are not of primary 
concern, the approach outlined in Section 4.3 is ordi­ 
narily preferred because usually the wave data base 
exists in terms of elevation spectra.
  (c)	Heave acceleration in irregular waves. 
Displacements in heave are of  less  direct importance 
to personnel and equipment than heave accelerations. 
(For example, heave accelerations are linked to sea­ 
sickness in Section 7.) The usual approach to measures 
of acceleration has been presented in Section 4.2. This 
approach involves the calculation of the fourth spectral 
moment of response, which is equal to the variance of 
response acceleration, and thus the variance of heave 
acceleration may easily be estimated once the basic 
heave displacement RAO is available.
  However, for the sake of illuminating the effect of 
ship size upon heave acceleration response, it is of 
interest to consider an alternate approach similar  to 
that employed for pitch response in the last sub-sec­ 
tion. Suppose first that consideration is restricted to 
long-crested waves and that heave acceleration is ex­ 
pressed in g's. On this basis, specializing Equation


0
""''


0	0	0	O
0	10	0	&O
u,	,-..	0	N


coo
0  ,o O
0"'  "'   ,0


(193), the 
fourth 
spectral 
moment 
(the heave 
acceler­ 
ation 
variance) 
may be 
written:


100


200	300 
400 500600



m4! 
rf =






00

\w.2 'rfa(w, /J,o; U0) /   
g\2  X



0

S,(w) dw










=:,o









1.0





Jn
t.l


=	I"' lw/ 7}3(w, /J,o; Uo)/ gl2X
w
2
/
g
0
(
w
4
 
I
 
r
f
)
 
S
 
,
(
w
)
 
d
w





(2
01
)




0


,::	0.5	 
::::!	(bl RESPONSE
AMPLITUOE 
OPERATORS


= f \(w,I w )2  'rf8 (w, µ 0;
0



U0 )\2 X





3
...s_
'  .,


0
110· 2	lnW
1.
5


1.
0




(
c
;
}
 
R
E
S
P
O
N
S
E
S
P
E
C
T
R
A
-
-
 
-
-
C
O
N
S
T
A
N
T
 
L
O
G


w
h
e
r
e 
t
h
e 
e
n
c
o
u
n
t
e
r 
fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y 
is 
d
e
n
o
t
e
d 
b
y 
w
, 
i
n
­ 
st
e
a
d 
o
f 
b
y 
t
h
e 
e
q
u
i
v
a
l
e
n
t 
e
x
p
r
e
s
si
o
n 
i
n
v
o
l
v
i
n
g 
w
a
v
e 
fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y 
a
n
d 
d
ir
e
c
ti
o
n
. 
R
e
c
a
ll
i
n
g 
t
h
e 
n
o
t
a
ti
o
n 
i
n 
S
e
c
­ 
ti
o
n 
4
.
1
, 
a
n
d 
t
h
e 
r
e
l
a
ti
o
n
s 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n 
d
is
p
l
a
c
e
m
e
n
t 
a
n
d 
a
c
c
e
l
e
r
a
ti
o
n 
s
h
o
w
n 
i
n 
S
e
c
ti
o
n 
3
.
2
, 
t
h
e 
q
u
a
n
ti
t
y 
i
n
si
d
e 
t
h
e 
a
b
s
o
l
u
t
e 
v
a
l
u
e 
si
g
n
s 
i
n 
t
h
e 
fi
r
st 
f
o
r
m
 
o
f 
t
h
e 
h
e
a
v
e


VI	0.5
0


-0.6	-
0.8
lnw


-1.2


accel
eratio
n 
varia
nce is 
the 
comp
lex 
ampli
tude 
of 
heave 
accel
eratio
n, in 
g's 
per 
unit 
wave 
ampli
tude; 
that 
is, the 
absol
ute 
value 
of 
this 
comp
lex 
numb
er is 
the 
RAO 
of 
heave 
accel
eratio
n, 
with 
accel
eratio
n ex­


Fig. 74


Log-
slope 
repres
entatio
n of 
pitchin
g 
respon
se to 
irregul
ar 
head 
sea


pres
sed 
in 
g's. 
The 
seco
nd 
for
m of 
the 
heav
e 
acce
l-


 

define a speetnun of heave acceleration that can  be 
used for purposes of analysis as in the treatment of 
pitching; that is. the product of the wave slope spec- 
trum and the square of the nondimensional heave ac- 
celeration RAO provides an  alternate  way to estimate 
a spectrum of heave acceleration. The wave slope form 
may also be transformed into the log-slope form.
  A log-slope plot of the nondimensional acceleration 
prediction for the geometrically similar ships treated 
previously is shown in Fig. 75. In a  similar  fashion, 
the figure indicates the relation between the log-slope 
wave spectrum, the squared nondimensional heave ac- 
celeration RAO, and the resulting estimates of a heave 
acceleration spectrum (here denoted 8'3(lnw». The re- 
sulting picture is similar to that  obtained  for  pitch, 
Fig. 74 and the same conclusion can be drawn; that is, 
the larger response of the small ship results almost 
entirely from its  smaller  size, because  it  responds  to 
a wider range of frequencies. Again, a  smaller  ship 
will always be worse off in acceleration than a similar 
larger ship, except perhaps in long swells.
In most cases the vertical acceleration due to the
combined effect of heave and pitch at a particular lo- 
cation in the ship is of more importance than heave 
acceleration alone. This can be analyzed in the same 
way, and can be expected to yield a picture similar to 
Fig. 75. This form of analysis is convenient for com- 
paring either the performance of different ships of the 
same size or that of the same ship at different speeds. 
See Section 5.
  (d)	Rolling  in irregular  waves.	Though there are 
some caveats that will be discussed later, the linear- 
random theory provides considerable insight into the 
rolling behavior of ships. The asymptotic behavior of 
the RAO for rolling in beam seas is the  same as  that 
for pitch in head seas; it tends toward zero  at  high 
wave frequency, and to wave slope at  low. Rolling is 
far more dependent upon wave  slope than  amplitude, 
so that the remarks about the contrast between the 
dimensional and the nondimensional forms of the RAO 
for pitch apply in this case also. The main difference 
between the pitch and the roll RAO is that the rolling 
RAO almost always has a much more pronounced res- 
onant peak, both higher and narrower than is the case 
for pitch. Because of the low damping, as noted in 
Section 3.8, resonant ship rolling amplitudes in re- 
sponse to regular waves vary typically between twice 
and ten times wave slope amplitude (pitch amplitudes 
tend to be less than twice wave slope) and this has an 
important effect upon the character of the rolling spec- 
trum. Fig.  76 illustrates  a typical  situation  of rolling 
in irregular long-crested waves where the wave direc- 
tion is somewhere near the beam  sea  case,  and  there 
is significant energy in the wave spectrum at a wave 
frequency corresponding to the resonant encounter 
frequency. In the top frame a typical wave elevation 
spectrum is shown schematically; in the middle a 
squared roll RAO in the roll! wave  amplitude  form; 
and at the bottom the predicted roll spectrum. What


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	101

are when applied to an initially lightly damped ship.
  In a very rough wind-driven beam or quartering sea 
almost any conventional ship will roll heavily because 
the range of practically attainable natural rolling pe- 
riods is usually within the range of wave frequencies 
present. In more moderate wind-driven seas the rolling 
may be less severe, not only because the  waves  are 
less steep, but because lower frequency components 
which might cause resonant rolling may not be pres- 
ent. If the latter is the case, the ship is then in a 
supercritical condition with respect to rolling. It can 
also be concluded that a long rolling period can be 
advantageous, since in general it shifts the supercrit- 
ical range to rougher seas.
  The case of ship rolling when at speed at oblique 
headings to short-crested waves is much more com- 
plicated than in long-crested oblique waves. (See Sub- 
section 4.9.) Relatively large changes in speed or head- 
ing may be required to reduce heavy resonant rolling 
because when the ship is moved out of synchronism 
with one band of wave components the many wave 
directions present makes it more likely to approach 
synchronism with another band.
  The caveats previously alluded to about the appli- 
cation of the linear-random theory to rolling are cen- 
tered upon whether or not the basic assumption, 
linearity of response, is satisfied. The mechanism pro- 
ducing the damping of pitch and heave is largely the 
radiation of ship generated waves (Section 3), a mech- 
anism that is linear to reasonable accuracy. But, as 
explained in Section 3.8, in the case of rolling, theory 
usually predicts wave radiation damping that is rela- 
tively much smaller than model experiments suggest, 
unless the ship geometry is such that rolling will pro- 
duce radiated waves of significant magnitude (ex- 
tremely shallow draft barges, some work boats, and


happens is that once squared, the narrow peak of the 
RAO is the only part that is significant, the roll spec- 
trum shape is controlled by the RAO, and the mag-
nitude of roll depends almost entirely upon the 
magnitude of wave spectral density near resonance. 
Hence, there is little practical advantage in using slope 
or log-slope spectra.
  Because ship rolling is ordinarily much more sharply 
"tuned" to a particular encounter frequency  band than 
is pitch, ships often appear to roll mainly in their own 
natural rolling period rather than in the dominant pe- 
riod of encounter determined by vessel speed, wave 
direction, and the ambient wave spectrum. If there is 
some energy in the encountered wave spectrum in a 
frequency band that corresponds to roll resonance, the 
sharply peaked RAO of a lightly damped vessel can 
amplify the response to this portion of the wave spec- 
trum to the point that the overall roll response is dom- 
inated by roll response components in the resonant 
period. This is why the relatively simple passive roll 
damping devices discussed in Section 6, which are ef- 
fective mainly at resonance, are as successful as they


the like). For more normal large ship forms it is nec- 
essary to augment the wave radiation damping sug- 
gested	by	the	basic	theory	by	semi-
empirical corrections for bilge keels, various viscous 
effects (Sec- tion 3.8) and the oscillatory dynamic lift 
forces upon appendages (Cox, et al 1977). Although  
the  majority of these augmentations are nonlinear, 
Schmitke (1978) found that for high-speed ships (e.g., 
frigates and de- stroyers) including the important  
factor  of  dynamic lift on appendages, which is 
roughly linear, gave good agreement between linear 
calculations and model and full-scale tests in the 
vicinity of synchronism.
  Thus, the degree to which linear-random theory 
will yield reasonable predictions for roll depends to 
an ex- tent upon the vessel and operating conditions. 
Early experiments suggested that the rolling  motion  
of  a ship fitted with bilge keels and moving through 
the water is not too far from linear if the  deck edges  
are not immersed (Lalangas, 1964),and that 
consequently the linear-random approach may be 
used in  many cases. Since then, conclusions from 
experimental and theoretical research are less 
sanguine (Tasai, et al


102	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



1973),(Fujii, et aI1975), (ITTC, 1979, 1981).Depending 
upon speed, some fraction of roll damping appears  to 
be nonlinear, which is to say dependent upon roll am- 
plitude. As noted in Section 3.8, most theoretical treat- 
ments involve the form of damping nonlinearity 
postulated by Froude in the 19th Century (INA, 1955). 
In addition, model tests of beam-sea rolling often show 
evidence of a weak nonlinearity in restoring moment. 
Unfortunately, it is not now possible to give simple 
rules about the conditions and ship  geometry  where 
the nonlinear effects are important enough to invali- 
date the linear-random approach, except perhaps to 
suggest that the lower the speed and the lighter the 
apparent damping the more important the nonlinear- 
ities may become.
  Because these nonlinearities are weak in the math- 
ematical sense for moderate roll angles, and  because 
roll is usually sharply tuned, there are  practical  ways 
of overcoming the difficulties in using linear spectral 
prediction methods. Several approaches have been sug- 
gested by Yamanouchi (1964), Kaplan (1966), Vassi- 
lopoulous (1971),Cox, et al (1977)and Schmitke (1978). 
Most involve an equivalent statistical linearization 
scheme where the nonlinear system is replaced by a 
conditionally linear one in which the RAO is a function 
of average or rms roll angle. This leads to an iterative 
solution where the roll magnitude predicted is com- 
pared with updated estimates until reasonable con- 
vergence is obtained.
   4.8	Validity of the Linear-Random Theory. As noted 
earlier, there are two crucial assumptions that underlie 
the methods under discussion. These are that the re- 
sponse of the vessel is a mathematically linear function 
of wave elevation or slope, and that the wave field is 
Gaussian. In the strict sense it is obvious that neither 
can be true. The logical consequence of the Gaussian 
assumption is that regardless of wave height  the 
troughs and crests must on average represent equal 
deviations from the mean water level, and further that 
wave elevation is unbounded. The strict interpretation 
of the linear assumption is that the vessel is wall-sided, 
travels on a straight course at constant speed, in waves 
of infinitesimal height, and never experiences motions 
that allow the forefoot or deck edge to approach  the 
free surface. However, in engineering it is  usually 
more important that an approach yield useful and rea- 
sonably correct results than that it be pure mathe- 
matically. In the present case, experience has shown 
that the linear and Gaussian assumptions usually take 
us a long way toward useful and reasonable answers, 
even under conditions where both assumptions are 
clearly violated. Thus when validity is mentioned in 
this context it means only the degree to which a valid 
engineering tool is available. How valid the tool is 
depends upon the type of vessel, to some extent its 
speed, the severity of the  wave conditions, the  mode 
of motion or the response  of interest,  and the  nature 
of the statistics it is desired to predict.



 

  The early work in exploring the validity of the 
method for ship design concentrated upon longitudinal 
motions and bending moments. The theory of linear 
systems (Price and Bishop, 1974) (Ochi and Bolton, 
1973), provides a number of approaches to the dem- 
onstration of validity in long-crested waves. One is that 
the observed response spectrum be the same as that 
predicted from RAO's obtained from theory or regular 
wave experiments. Fig. 77 (Jacobs, 1960) shows a 
three-way comparison of predicted bending moment 
spectra in long-crested irregular head seas: (a) As pre- 
dicted from model tests in regular waves, (b) as pre- 
dicted from calculated bending moments in regular 
waves, and (c) as determined directly from the  record  
of bending moment obtained in an irregular tank sea. 
Though there are relatively large percentage differ- 
ences in spectral density shown in  Fig.  77, it  should 
be remembered that the quantity used in a design 
application is the square root of the spectral area. Thus 
in application a margin of difference such as shown in 
the figure translates into statistical prediction uncer- 
tainties of the order of ten or fifteen percent, a mag- 
nitude which is usually less  than  the  uncertainty  in 
the definition of real wave conditions at sea. 
Ochi(1964) extended this approach to more severe 
towing tank waves and oblique seas, and to seakeeping 
parameters somewhat more sophisticated than just  the  
spectra, with quite positive results.
  Another more basic approach is to assess the degree 
to which RAD's derived from towing tank  regular 
wave tests are invariant with regular wave height. 
Dalzell (1964) for example pursued this approach to 
extremely steep regular waves (length-to-height ratio 
up to 9). The conclusion was that amplitudes of head-


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	103


sea motion and bending moment response were rea­ 
sonably proportional to wave amplitude for a range of 
wave steepnesses that covered a significant part of the 
physically possible range.
  A third approach from the theory of  linear systems  
is to identify the RAO's and transfer functions by cross-
spectral analysis of observed wave and response time 
histories, and compare the answers with regular wave 
test results, as for example in Dalzell and Ya­ manouchi 
(1958) and Dalzell (1962). This type of anal­ ysis 
enables one to obtain phase information, an improved 
RAO estimate, and an estimate of statistical errors. A 
further variation on this theme (Dalzell, 1963) 
compared cross-spectral estimates of RAO's from ex­ 
periments involving a range of wave severities, since 
the derived RAO must also be invariant with wave 
significant height. Finally, a fourth approach involved 
an inversion of the frequency domain descriptions of 
towing tank model response into the time domain ac­ 
cording to linear theory, and using the result to cal­ 
culate deterministic responses to  known  wave 
elevation records (Dalzell, 1963). The general conclu­ 
sion from all the work was that the linear-random 
theory could be used for predictions, with practical 
validity, of the rms longitudinal motions (and deriva­ 
tions) of normal ships at reasonable speeds. More re­ 
cent experience (Cummins, 1974) (Ochi, 1974), tends to 
bear this out. There are, however, two caveats asso­ 
ciated with naval practice. It appears that nonlineari­ 
ties in heave and pitch may become practically 
significant for Froude numbers in excess  of  0.3, and 
for ships with extremely large bulbs (Smith and Salve­ 
son, 1970). Fortunately, these nonlinearities are rela­ 
tively weak. One practical,  but not  rigorous,  solution 
is to make predictions using RAO's from regular wave 
experiments in which the  wave  height  is comparable 
to the significant irregular wave height of interest.
  The situation with respect to ship rolling has been 
mentioned in the previous sub-section.
  All the discussion just concluded involves model ex­ 
periments, and it has been of concern to consider scale 
effects. There have been a number of full-scale ship 
trials in which the major objectives have included the 
examination of the validity of the linear-random the­ 
ory; as noted for example, in Gerritsma and Smith 
(1967), Aertssen and van Sluijs (1972), Beukelman and 
Buitnhek (1973), and Taylor and Lundgren (1976). In 
cases where the apparent waves were unidirectional, 
some quite reassuring agreement among full-scale 
trials, model experiments and theory have been ob­ 
tained. Fig. 55, Section 3, is an example of such results 
from Gerritsma and Smith (1967).
  The validity of the linear-random approach for other 
than normal ship forms has been less well documented. 
In the case of the catamaran no adverse findings are 
known for the ordinary large-waterplane type. How­ 
ever, the low-waterplane type (SWATH) is known to 
have weak nonlinearities in longitudinal motions, even 
in the theory of Lee and Curphy (1977), so that some



caution is required. The theoretical nonlinearities are 
qualitatively similar to those discussed  in the context 
of ship rolling. Experimentally, some SWATH con­ 
cepts have displayed what may be considered strong 
nonlinearities, sub-harmonic response in roll for in­ 
stance, and this is a problem not yet explained.
  In most instances the linear-random approach is not 
considered applicable to planing craft at speeds above 
which significant dynamic lift is generated (Savitsky, 
1968) (Savitsky and Brown, 1976) (Fridsma, 1969). It 
should also be  noted  that  under  some  circumstances 
a planing vessel can experience strong nonlinear (sub­ 
harmonic) response in heave and pitch. At present 
writ­ ing, argument exists about applicability to the 
surface effect ship concept. Some studies indicate that 
the lin­ ear-random approach is practically valid, 
others do not. In the case of the semi-submerged 
platform, complete applicability depends largely upon 
how heavily damped pitch, roll or heave is, and upon 
initial stability. Semi­ submersibles with relatively low 
initial stability are prone to steady tilt (Numata, et al 
1976), and some­ times to strong sub-harmonic 
response in pitch or roll. The more transparent the 
semi-submersible  is  to waves, the less likely that 
wave damping will control damping at motion 
resonances, and the  more  likely that the motion at 
resonance will be nonlinear. How­ ever, linear-random 
predictions that do not heavily in­ volve wave 
excitation at a resonance are usually considered valid.
  4.9	Period Relationships.  The illustrative examples 
in the earlier part of this section show that in general 
the magnitude of vessel motions response will depend 
upon the interacting effects of vessel speed, wave 
spec­ trum, dominant wave direction and the 
characteristics of the response RAO, which depend in 
turn mainly upon the proportions and geometry of the 
ship's hull. Though the principles  are  not the same 
for all  types of vessels, the intent here is to summarize 
some trends that have been found helpful to a general 
understand­ ing of the relationship between the 
behavior in waves and the geometry of the 
conventional displacement ship.
  Of the six modes of motion, the most important 
three (pitch, heave and roll) have natural frequencies,  
since in each case there is a  hydrostatic  restoring  
moment or force. As noted in Section 3, the regular 
wave re­ sponse for these modes of motion may 
involve signif­ icant magnification due to resonance 
for wave encounter frequencies near the natural 
frequencies. It should be clear from the discussion of 
rolling in irreg­ ular seas that rolling motion should be  
much  reduced if it is possible to avoid resonance (or 
synchronism) with wave components having 
significant energy. As also noted in Section 3, the 
magnitude of pitch and heave response to regular 
waves is not entirely deter­ mined by synchronism 
with wave encounter frequency since the magnitude of 
the wave excitation forces and moments varies with 
wave length as well as wave amplitude. However, for 
displacement ships of con-


104	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE





























5	6	7	8	9	10	12	14 16 20 2
NATURAL  PERIOD -SEC
Fig. 78 Nomogroph for determining conditions for synchronous oscillation in regulor waves



ventional form the natural frequencies of pitch and 
heave usually locate roughly  the dominant  response, 
as discussed further in Section 8. This justifies further 
consideration of the conditions for synchronous mo­ 
tion. It has also been found that phase relationships 
leading to wet decks and slamming are associated with 
resonant conditions, which provide further justification 
(Szebehely, 1955) (Lewis, 1955).
  For purposes of analysis of resonant behavior of 
ships it is useful to consider period and wavelength 
rather than frequency relationships. If we assume reg­ 
ular long-crested waves in deep water w have from
Section 2, wave frequency, w = (21rg I Lw) 12 and from 
the basic definition the encounter period, T. = 21r I w•. 
Substituting  these into  Equation  (188) for the encoun­
ter frequency, as well as expressing speed in terms of 
Froude number, Fn, the period of encounter becomes:
T =	(L  wl ut


Synchronism results when A = 1.0. Setting A to unity 
and solving the result for the Froude number for syn­ 
chronism, Fn.,
Fns COS	= (Lwl L)112   { -    1-	±  (LwlL  f
	(203)
µ.	-J2m	Tn  ;{ g/ £ )112
Since the Froude number is considered positive in the 
conventions established thus far, cos µ. fixes  the sign 
of the left-hand side of the solution. Thus, for fixed µ., 
L, Lw and T,,.i there may be one,  two or no solutions 
for the synchronous Froude number.
  A dimensional form of the last relationship has 
been used in developing the nomograph shown in Fig. 
78. This nomograph yields solutions within the ranges 
of speed, wave direction, wave length, and natural pe­ 
riods that are of importance for displacement ships. It
may be noted in the lower right hand side of the nom­ 
ograph that the lines for various wavelengths come


e	l,' 
\(21r) 2


l,' 
2


(202)


together and cross 
one another so as to 
define an en­


-	(LI  Lw)	Fn cos µ.I


velope. The envelope is defined by 
the relation, U0  cos



in which L is ship length. A convenient way of ex­ 
pressing how near the period of encounter is to syn­ 
chronism is the tuning factor,  A  = T/  TE, where 1'; 
is the natural period of the j'th  response.  Then  with 
the aid of the expression for the encounter period:
A = [Tn;{g/ £ )112 ] ( L / L wf 2
X  !(21r)- 112-	(L  I L w)112Fn cos µ.I


µ. = gTn/ 81r, and corresponds to the condition 
where a singularity is expected in the encountered 
spectrum (See Section 4.3). Thus, for example, a 
ship having a 20-second roll period should 
experience near-resonant roll response to a broad 
range of wave lengths making up the peak of the 
encountered spectrum if it makes 20 knots in 
quartering waves (wave direction about 40 degrees 
from Fig. 78).
  As may be noted from Fig. 78, wave direction 
affects the conditions for synchronism appreciably, 
but a good










































0.8	1.0	1.2	1,4	1.6	1,8      20	22	2.4
Tft/..rCT;


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	105

  These statements go some 
distance toward explain­ ing the 
behavior of ships in head irregular 
storm seas. For instance, as a rule, 
ships are reasonably comfort­ 
able when they are hove to at very 
low speeds. The reason for this is 
that synchronism occurs only 
with wave components that are so 
short that they have only 
moderate effects. As the speed is 
increased, the period of encounter 
with longer wave components 
becomes short enough to 
approach synchronism with the 
ship's natural periods, and the 
motions become more violent. 
When violent motions occur, there 
will be the greatest likelihood of 
wet decks and slamming,  since 
the ship is then responding 
predominantly to the wave com­ 
ponents that lead to these effects. 
These trends are confirmed by 
model tests and by observations 
at sea. Some ships must reduce 
speed more than others to ease 
motions in the same sea. For 
example, a 400-ft naval 
combatant generally can maintain 
higher speed than a 400-ft cargo 
ship. To  obtain  a general picture 
of the lowest speeds at which 
serious pitching and heaving are 
to be expected for ships of 
different pro­ portions in irregular 
head seas, we may consider the 
conditions that result in 
synchronism with the wave 
components of approximately one 
ship length. Viewing the curves in 
Fig. 79 as representing the regular 
com­ ponent waves of an irregular 
sea, one can see from
the figure that, at any particular  value of 
Tn/g IL) 112
Froude  numbers on or above the curve for 
Lwl L  =
0.75 will result in synchronism  with wave 
components


Fig. 79   Ship speeds  for synchronism  with  regular  head  seas 
of  various lengths (V	U0)


deal can be learned for the case of pitch or heave by 
considering the head-sea case alone. Fig. 79 was pre­ 
pared by specializing the foregoing relation for the 
synchronous Froude number to the head-sea case. The 
figure shows the Froude number (and speed-length 
ratio) for synchronism with head seas of various wave 
lengths, for different values of the natural period pa­ 
rameter, Tn/ g/ L )112 (as well as a period-length ratio 
in English units). The range of the natural period pa­ 
rameter was chosen to reflect the attainable range for 
conventional ships, and will be elaborated upon later. 
It is clear from this figure that, in regular head waves, 
synchronism with a particular wave length can easily 
be avoided by a change in speed.
  The discussions and examples in Section 3 and the 
earlier part of this section indicate certain general con­ 
clusions about ship behavior in head irregular waves:
  •	Only the wave components of about¾ ship length 
and above have appreciable effects on motions in head 
seas because the excitation in very short waves is much 
reduced, even at resonance.
  •	The most severe and objectionable results of ship 
motions (wet decks, slamming, high accelerations) re­ 
sult from the responses to wave components that are 
both relatively long and near synchronism with the 
ship's natural pitching and heaving periods.


as long as or longer than the ship, and may theref ore 
lead to heavy pitching and/or heaving, wet decks, and 
slamming in a storm sea having a wide range of com­ 
ponents. At speeds somewhat below the curve, syn­ 
chronism will occur only with wave components 
shorter than the ship, which would not cause serious 
pitching. Thus the curve for Lwl L = l.O may be con­ 
sidered as an approximate boundary between moder­
ate and serious pitching and heaving in irregular head 
seas.
  To an extent, this approximation to the boundary 
between moderate and severe longitudinal  motions 
may be extended to oblique  wave  directions  so long 
as the beam wave case is avoided. To accomplish this 
an effective wavelength is defined to be Lwl cos µ. 
When the effective length is substituted for the wave­ 
length in the previous equation for the synchronous 
Froude number, it is possible to present the results  as 
in Fig. 80, which defines zones of subcritical 
operation in oblique seas. Subcritical refers to  the  
situation where synchronism occurs with waves that 
are  too short to produce serious effects, i.e., Lw ::;; 
0.75 L.
  The generalizations for longitudinal motions of 
con­ ventional displacement ships tend to be 
incomplete without some relatively simple 
connection between ship geometry and the 
magnitudes of pitch and heave periods. To start 
from the results in Section 3.7, we may take the 
expression for the uncoupled, undamped natural 
frequency of pitch and convert to natural pe­ riod as 
follows:


106	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

inertia coefficient,  CL1      =  ILi L3 B.  Making these  sub­
stitutions and reducing, we obtain
156 + A55	7C/ + VA s
Css	-	gC1LBL
  Hence the following three approximate expressions 
for the on-dimensional natural period of pitching re­ 
sult:


1; 2 _


n V   )   12    (CK2   + A)56' 12


(a)


Tn5(g/L)	- 271"(


1	1
BL2	GIL





=	(:!.._	+	5 )
71" L 3 B	C1L


112



(b)



(204)


27T	(	w


)L 112


=	lOOO(pg)½ (L/lO0)a B
C/ + A)	112


(	GIL


(c)







T,.//L
0	2	T3,.lfVi 4











5	6	7


These equations 
separate the 
influence of 
dimensions relative 
to displacement 
(first radical) from 
the influ­ ence of 
hull form and 
distribution of 
weights and buoy­ 
ancy (second 
radical). In form (b) 
the ship's volume is 
expressed in terms 
of the 
nondimensional 
ratio 7 I L3, and 
LIB is a left-over 
ratio usually 
determined on the 
basis of other 
considerations than 
seakeeping.  The 
third form (c) is 
obtained by 
substituting the 
conven­ tional  
displacement-
length ratio,  W 
/(LI 100)3,   where


Fig. 80 Graph showing conditions for synchronism with waves of effective
length  equal  to  ship length (V	U0 )


Wis in long tons and pg = ½s.o in salt water.
From the foregoing approximations it is clear that


in order to shorten the period ratio, Tns (g IL) 112 in­



Tn5 = 27T (56 56 A56)l/2


creased length 
relative to 
displacement is 
generally 
desirable. The 
appearance of the 
ratio,  LIB,  in  
the first radical 
of forms (b) and 
(c) means  that  7 
I L3  is not as 
good a parameter 
as 7 I BL2 and 
needs to. be


where /55 is the longitudinal mass moment of inertia,
A


adjusted by multiplying by LIB-not  that red  cmg
LIB  is desirable in itself (generally the reverse is the


   55 is the hydrodynamic added moment of inertia and 
C55 is the pitch restoration coefficient. To clarify the 
effects of ship dimensions, form and other variables it


case). On the other hand, if LIB is determined by other 
considerations (such as stability), then 7 I L3 and WI
(LI  100)3   are  very useful indexes to u e..	.


is desirable to introduce non-dimensional coefficients 
in expressing  each of  these three  terms. Thus 155  = A 
k 2 = p'vC/ L2, where CxL is the longitudinal radius ot  
gyration,  k1111 , and  Cx is the coefficient,  k   IL.  A56 
represents the contribution to the  longitudinarmoment 
of  inertia  due to the entrained  water and depends to
a large extent on the longitudinal  distribution  of buoy­
  

Fig. 81 shows typical values of pitchmg pen d­ 
length ratio as functions of displacement-length 
ratio, as  well  as  of  7 I L3,  7  I BL2, and  C8  T/ L. 
Bo h  model and full-scale data are presented, and  
the  third  form of the above approximation was 
used to curve-fit the data on the assumption 
(Lewis, 1955) that most of the


ancy.  It  can  be  expressed as A	= p7A sL2, from


variation occurs in the first radical of Equation (204c).


Equation (164), where A


55
is a non-dimensional 
added


It is clear from the 
figure that this last 
assumption is 
reasonable, since the 
spread of the data is 
well re­


mass moment of inertia coefficient analagous to C/.
Finally, C55 is given approximately in Table 13 of Sec­ 
tion 3 (neglecting speed effect shown in Fig. 51) as C55
=  pg'v GML + LCF2 C33 •  Neglecting the second term
and assuming GML :::; BML, we have roughly Cs5 ::::: 
pgIL, where IL is the longitudinal moment of inertia of 
the  waterplane.  This  can  be  rewritten  as   C55   ::::: 
pgCL1 L3 B, where GIL is the conventional waterplane


flected by only a 20 perce!1t variation in the 
urv ­ fitting constant, C, in which the second 
radical is embedded. For first approximations, 
values of A s of
0.03	or 0.04 are reasonable, and are consistent  
with Fig. 81 (See also Fig. 51, Section 3.7).  The  
gyradius for conventional ships is typically 
between 24 and 26 percent of length, i.e., Cx = 
0.24 to 0.26. Noting that nearly  the entire 
practical  range of  ship displacement-


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	107


length ratios is represented in Fig. 81, it appears that 
once length is established for a conventional ship the


ASSUMED LENGTH-BEAM RATIO, L/8
18  12  8 7	8	5


possibilities for variation of pitching period by changes 
in form or proportions are relatively limited. Hence, it 
is essential that a wide range of ship lengths be con­ 
sidered in design.
  Finally, in order to clarify the design problem of 
improving subcritica211l performance by reducing the pe­
is useful. To obtain this the ship's volume is eliminated 
by substituting LBTCa for 7 and GIL is eliminated by 
introducing a waterplane inertia coefficient, CA = k,,./ 
L, where ka, the area radius of gyration, is defined  by 
h = k/ AwP• Hence,


0.50---- - - - ------.



2.8

2.4

2.2

2.0
1.8  :..:.;.
.9
1.8 ..:'
1.4


Ba	k/  AwP  _	2 AwP  _ C   2C	d


CIL= IL / L


ka
LaB	-
	L2 
LB -


A	wP an


1.2

1.0


Equation 211(204a) becomes



VfL3



X 103


r.J(g/LJ -
c'j9/l..--•-x-L-/8



0.8


Tns (g / £ )


= 21r (ff2 
(i:J112 (C/	


0.10


2	8	10
0	50	100	150	200	250	300	350
DISPlAC
EMENT·L
ENGTH 
RATIO, 
W/(IJ100J
3 (ENG. 
UNITS)


2A r2	(204d)	 	
8	7	8	5	4.5
L/v
Note that Cal CwP is the vertical prismatic coefficient,	 	


CvP• The period ratio has thus been expressed as three 
factors, covering: Dimensions, form coefficients and 
non-dimensional coefficients dependent on longitudinal 
distribution of hull mass, buoyancy and waterplane 
area. Since 7 has been eliminated, this expression is 
independent of ship size.
  Hence, the following specific steps appear to be fa­ 
vorable to  reduced TnS (g IL)½:
  •	Decrease in draft-to-length ratio, TI L;
  •	Increased waterplane area coefficient in conjunc­ 
tion with decreased Ca (i.e., reduced vertical prismatic 
and more V-shaped sections)
  •	Reduced mass moment of inertia coefficient, CK
= kyyl L (i.e., reduced mass radius of gyration in re­ 
lation to length), reduced added-inertia coefficient, A ;,r,
= A 55/     p7 L 2  (which is not ordinarily calculated  or as­
sumed to be a variable, although it varies with speed 
and other factors, as shown in Section 3), and
•	Increased waterplane inertia coefficient, CA = kal
L (i.e., increased waterplane radius of gyration in re­ 
lation to length), which implies increased fullness of 
waterlines in the ends of the ship.
  Another useful form for the equation of natural 
pitching period, assuming GML :::: BML = hf 7, is:


0.02	0.03	0.04	0.05
V jBL2 =  i7	= C1 T/L
Fig. 81 Variation of natural pitching period with ship characteristics



produce the following estimate for the natural heaving 
period:

Tna- -	277" [p7C+ Aaa]l/2
88


We may express the heave restoration coefficient with 
the aid of the waterplane area coefficient, CwP, as C88
= pgCwPLB. Defining a nondimensional heave added 
mass coefficient as  A  =  A 88/  p7, the  numerator  of the 
expression for heave natural period becomes p7(1
+ A;3 ) .   Making  the substitutions  and  nondimension­
alizing the expression, the approximation to the heave 
natural period ratio becomes:


T  =	277" k 
n5	g112 (BMLt2


(205)



It appears that the draft-length ratio, 
TIL is again an important factor, 
followed by the vertical prismatic


where k y is an effective radius of gyration, L(C/  + 
Ai5 )v 2 ,  which with the typical values quoted above is 
about 30 percent of length.
  As for heaving, we may adapt the results from Sec­ 
tion 3 for the uncoupled natural heaving frequency to


coefficient, Cvp = Cal CwP• The added mass coefficient, 
A ; 3 , varies very little for conventional ships, and is 
usually  taken to be unity for  first approximations, Fig.
51. Note the similarity to Equation (204d) for pitch. 
The foregoing relationships allow the natural period


108	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

ratios to be estimated in very early stages of design stern bulbs were incorporated so as to produce larger 
(Section 3) and allow the conditions for synchronous than normal added mass inertia, and thus longer than 
pitching and heaving in regular waves to be deter- normal natural pitching periods.
mined. It  has been noted that  the  most significant fea-		Another method proposed for obtaining supercritical 
tures  of the  heave  and  pitch  RAO's are  more or less	operation involves drastic reduction in longitudinal wa- 
dictated  by  natural  periods.  The  fact that  reasonably	terplane inertia coefficient,with a semi-submerged hull 
close estimates   of natural  periods  can be made using	similar to a surfaced submarine (Lewis, et al 1960). 
only the most basic principal dimensions and form coef- Saunders (1965)points out that old style submersibles 
ficients  has  an  important  consequence,  which is that	could often maintain high speeds in very rough seas, 
once the principal characteristics of the ship are se-  operating  upon the  surface  in the  supercritical  condi- 
leeted a good part  of its expected behavior in a seaway	tion. Such a  hull  pitches  very  little,  though  heaving 
is determined. Over the years it has proven very  dif-  accelerations  may be  rather  high,  and  the  decks  are 
ficult to produce large changes in the longitudinal mo- very wet.
tions  of  conventional  displacement  ships  with  small			The idea of design for supercritical operation has 
changes  in form or size. But the importance of changes		found most practical application in the design of semi- 
in proportions  is considered  further   in Section 8.		submerged platforms. In this case the natural periods 
The  foregoing   analyses  raise  the interesting  tech-	achieved by the un-ship-like geometry are  usually nical 
possibility  of attaining  the supercritical condition		longer than the periods of typical waves encountered, 
of operation  for  ships;  that  is, going  fast enough into		but not usually longer than the longest components in
head seas so that the periods of encounter with the a severe  storm,  so that  the  semi-submerged  platform 
longest important wave components are well under the too is not always supercritical. The same may be said 
natural pitching period. In other words, when the su- for the SWATH (Small Waterplane Twin-Hull) ship 
percritical condition is reached the ship is going so fast (Lee and Curphy, 1977) (See Section 8.5).
that  it does not have  time to respond to a  wave before			4.10    Long-Term   Performance    Predictions.	The treat- 
it has passed and the next one has arrived. The  pos-  ment  thus  far  has  been  of  measures of short-term sibility 
of attaining  supercritical  speeds depends upon		response to one sea  as  defined  by  a spectrum  that 
the  fact  that  there  is  an  upper  limit to  the length of		applies to a stationary process. The result is essentially 
wave components  normally found  at  sea. Oceanogra-		conditional; that is, the response is predicated on the 
phers  have established  that  the  longer and harder the		condition that the specified sea occurs. Practical per- 
wind blows, the longer are the longest wave compo- formance  predictions  and  design  decisions have been 
nents  present  in the  sea. The upper  limit for different		made upon the results for one "design"  sea, but cur- 
sea conditions has not been firmly established. How-  rent  practice has tended away from this approach. The 
ever, Moskowitz, et aI, (1963)indicated a limit between		problem is that the probability of  occurrence of any 
625 and 1060m (2000 and 3400 ft), with about 800m particular one of the  sea  spectra  noted in Section 2 is 
(2600 ft)  being  average  for  a sample of severe North		virtually zero. Thus if the response in question is sen- 
Atlantic   seas  (winds  of  50-65 knots).  In less  severe		sitive not only to the area but to the shape  of the 
storms  the  limit would be lower.		spectrum, or the range of significant frequencies, the 
The  other  factors   affecting supercritical  operation	answer obtained may correspond to  an  event of low are  
ship  factors.  The  faster   the  ship  and the longer		probability and thus may be misleading. Accordingly, 
the  natural  pitching  and heaving  periods, the easier it		when practical  performance  predictions  are at issue, 
is  to  attain  the  supercritical  condition. If the longest		current practice is tending toward the analysis and 
wave component in a  given  storm  sea  is 315 m (1000  interpretation  of collections of seaways, covering the 
ft),  then  the  supercritical  condition for  a  155-m (500-  expected  range  of  spectral  areas and  shapes.  Such 
ft)  ship would lie above the  curve  for  Lwl  L   = 2.0 in		analyses are particularly important in the synthesis of 
Fig.  79. The speed  required  to attain  it for  any value		structural design loads, and in fact the  concept of the 
of  the  period-ratio  is also  shown  in the figure, which		synthesis of the response to collections of seaways
shows  that  the  Froude  numbers  required would typi-	originated in this context (See Chapter IV).
cally  be  in  excess  of  those   usually appropriate  for			Several collections (families) of seaways have been 
merchant  and  most naval  vessels. This illustrates  the		discussed in Section 2. Mechanically, the response cal- 
practical  difficulties in assuring supercritical operation		culation involves repeating the  linear-random  predic- 
in all but  very mild sea conditions. Attempts to develop		tions outlined in Section 4.1 for as many seaways as 
supercritical  ships  usually  involve radical departures		are defined in the collection, and then interpreting the 
from  the  usual  ship form  in order to lengthen natural		collected results in the light of the expected frequency 
periods.  Furthermore,   a considerable  increase in bow		of occurrence of each member of the seaway collection. 
freeboard  may be required.		Essentially, the analysis of the response to collections 
An early example of a ship designed for supercritical	of seaways is a strategy to overcome the statistical 
operation is the Escort  Research  ship design described		nonstationarity of real seas  over  the  long  term,  and 
by  Oakley (1960).In this  approach very  large bow and		the fact just mentioned that there is negligible prob-


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	109
ability  of  any  particular   sea  spectrum being exactly		the geometry of a series of ship forms related in some 
replicated.		way is assumed, motion RAO's are estimated for each, 
The most  important  part  of such  procedures  is the	and the variances and spectral moments required for 
definition of the  appropriate  statistical  measure or cri-		a large number of possible performance criteria are 
terion  of  performance,   to  be  discussed  in Section 7.		computed for each of a large number of hypothetical 
Once this  is done the  next  step  is to define  the wave		seaways.  Computer storage  of such results  allows the
environment (Section 2) in terms  of a collection of rep-		major part of the numerical work to be recaptured 
resentative  wave  spectra,  and  a probability  of occur-			when the undefined portions of the analysis (the exact 
rence    for    each.   The   linear-random prediction   of			criteria and the seaway probabilities) are defined. One 
response  for each spectrum  is then associated with the			of the primary justifications for the data base approach 
probability  of occurrence of the  spectrum. Finally, the			for ship design is the observation that large changes 
predictions  are  weighted  in  accordance  with  the  as-			in a response statistic can ordinarily only be made by 
sociated  probabilities  to  form  the  desired  statistical			major changes in ship geometry; that is, by changes 
measure  of performance  for  comparison with criteria.			in principal dimensions and coefficients, the class of 
There  are  a number  of variations  of this type of anal-			ship remaining constant.  Examples  incorporating  a 
ysis  that  follow from  the  various  kinds of measures			standard  series  approach  to  the  geometry  for  mer- 
of performance to be discussed in Section 7, and doubt-			chant ships include Bales & Cummins (1970)and Lou- 
less  others  will  arise.  By  far  most  of the numerical			kakis & Chryssostomidis (1975). Examples including 
work and  manual  preparation  for a collection analysis			extensive variations of operational parameters  for lim- 
is in the  generation  of RAO's  and the subsequent  var-			ited numbers of existing ships are: Bales, et al (1975), 
iance  computations  for  a variety  of wave spectra.			Baitis, et al (1976a & b). These latter are most useful 
The  increasing  availability  of computers with mass	in obtaining estimates of  performance  for  existing 
storage  capability,  has  given rise  to seakeeping  data			ships, for comparison with estimates for a new design, 
base development. To produce a data  base of this type,			or in the  design  of new  ship systems  on similar ships.





110	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

(x, y, z) due to the translations and rotations of the 
body. From basic kinematics it can be shown that, for 
small motions,



where


 
                         
(
2
0
7
)

!l is 
t
h
e
 
v
e
c
t
o
r
 
o
f
 
t
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
o
r
i
g
i
n
= 
(Tf1
, 
Tf2, 
Tfs)
r. is 
the 
positi
on 
vector 
of 
point 
x, y, 
z
= 
(x, 
y, z)











F
i
g
.
 
8
2
 
N
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
f
o
r
 
a
b
s
o
l
u
t
e
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
v
e
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
s
 
i
n
 
h
e
a
d
 
s
e
a
s
,
 
a
s
 
s
c
a
l
a
r
f
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
s
  
a
t
  
t
i
m
e
 
(
y
 
=
 
o
)


The individual component amplitudes of 'e are given 
by


f1 = Tf1 + ZTf s-  Y"fis 
f2 = 1f 2 + "Z"fis - Z"fj4 
fs = "fis + Y"fi4- "Z"fis



(208)


coupling between the 
longitudinal and transverse 
mo­ tions, the problem  is 
simpler.  It  is further  
simplified if head seas only 
are considered, or if the point 
is located  on the ship's  
center  line. Insofar  as  the 
eval­
uation of specific ship or platform 
designs is concerned


  The velocity and acceleration at any point are found 
by differentiating the motion with respect to time. Re­
call that thg time gependent motion at any point is 
written as: e<t) = eiw,t
Thus, the complex amplitudes of the velocities and 
accelerations are given by
! the complex amplitude of velocity
vector  = iw.  . and	(209)
't the complex amplitude of acceleration 
vector = -w.2
  To find the translatory motions, velocities or accel­ 
erations at any point on the basis of the preceding


the responses that may be derived from 
longitudinal plane motions are often of more 
importance than the heave or pitch motions 
themselves. Specifically, the responses of 
particular importance are vertical: the vertical 
motion at any point along the length of  the 
ship (local heave); the vertical velocities at any 
point along the length; the vertical 
accelerations at  any point; and the vertical 
motion and velocity at any point relative to the 
sea surface, Fig. 82.
  In this case Equation (208) for vertical local 
motion reduces to
fs =  "fis - X"fis	(210)
where f3  is the complex amplitude  of  vertical  motion
et  point x, 0, z, with µ = 180 deg, assuming that both


equations it is simply necessary to add several complex
numbers  and  multiply  by iw. or  -w.2 as necessary.


and 1j3 h!!_ve been normalized by dividing by wave


Since these equations are in complex number format, 
they give both the absolute, or scalar, magnitudes and 
the phase angles for a ship in  regular  waves.  Note 
that these complex amplitudes have been normalized 
by dividing by the exciting wave amplitude, so that 
they represent response per  unit  wave amplitude,  as 
in Section 4.
  To proceed to irregular seas, response spectra can 
be obtained from wave spectra and appropriate RAOs, 
using the techniques discussed in Section 4. In this 
case we are concerned only with the absolute or scalar 
amplitudes of response, since the phase angles of the 
component waves of the sea are assumed to be random.
Hence, the RAOs are simply l j, i!i), I't,j, where the 
sidebars signify that only the at>so ute values of the 
complex amplitudes have been taken. From the re­ 
sulting response spectra the variance and other sta­ 
tistical quantities can be calculated as needed.
  (b)	Longitudinal motions. If the motions are sep­ 
arated into the longitudinal and transverse  modes,  as 
in  the case of  a  symmetrical  ship,  where  there  is no


amplitude, { . For calculating responses to 
long-crested irregular head seas it is only 
necessary to know fifsl and fifsl, the 
amplitudes of heave and pitch. The RAO is 
then
                         (211)
where Ifsl represents the absolute magnitude 
of the complex amplitude. (Note that phase 
informa,!.ion em­ bodied in Tf3 and Tfs was 
needed to calculate 3). Fig. 282 defines the 
notation for simple problems in head seas on 
which the preceding equations are based.
  The asymptotic properties of the local 
vertical mo­ tion RAO are the same as for 
heave (Section 3.2), that is, as wave frequency 
approaches zero (long waves) pitch approaches 
wave slope (which approaches zero) and the 
heave RAO approaches unity, so that the local 
vertical motion RAO also approaches unity. At 
very high frequencies both pitch and heave 
RAO's tend to zero, so that the local vertical 
motion RAO also does. The qualitative 
differences between the heave RAO and the 
local vertical motion RAO  are  slight. When 
the point of interest is far removed from the 
origin,


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	111


the pitching terms usually have the effect of producing 
a much larger apparent resonance peak of vertical 
motion than for heave alone near midship. Because of 
the phasing between heave and  pitch,  the  amplitude 
of vertical motion is usually much larger at the bow 
than at the stern. The longitudinal location of the cen­ 
ter of flotation is also a factor.
  In general, if the amplitude of heave-or of vertical 
motion at any point-is known in regular waves, the 
corresponding velocity and acceleration  amplitudes 
can be determined from


wave, the radiated wave (Section 3) and the 
wave due to the ship's steady forward speed. 
The traditional assumption is that the principal 
component is the in­ cident wave and that the 
other components tend to cancel each other; i.e., 
the incident wave is not distorted by the presence 
of the ship. This may or may not be true and 
will be discussed further in the next subsec­ 
tion.
  Assuming that the wave is not distorted by the 
pres­ ence of the ship and z = 0, the amplitude of 
the relative vertical motion in general is given by


 lfsl = w. llsl 
i't al = w.2 ilsl


(212)


R	= a - lxii = 'ria - Z'ifs
+ y'rj4 - iii
= 'ria - Z'ris 
+ Y'ri,




(213)


Hence, the response amplitude operators (squared) can
be transformed from motion to velocity by multiplying 
successive points by w. and to acceleration by multi­ 
plying by w.2. In evaluating ship performance the ver­
tical acceleration at critical locations is of particular 
importance.
  Also of interest is the relative vertical motion be­ 
tween a point in the ship and the surface of the en­ 
countered wave. This relative motion  in regular wave 
is found by subtracting the free-surface motion  from 
the vertical ship motion at the desired point, taking 
account of their phase relationship. The free-surface 
motion is composed of the incident wave, the diffracted


- ie-ik(z cos µ. + ii sin µ.)
where  Ixii is the complex amplitude of the wave at x
= x, y = y relative  to the  body coordinate  
system. In the case of  pitch and heave in head 
seas this reduces
to
IR = Ia  -   fx = ('ifs  - X 1j6-	I eikx)	(214)
where lx is the complex wave amplitude_at x_=
relative to the body coordinate system, or t. = t e;1cz.
  Then the RAO which requires only the scalar or 
absolute amplitude is




,









0	z	3
L.,JL
I

•
13
2





0

Fig. 83 Measured magnitude of relative motion RAOs in regular head waves (O'Dea, 1983)


112	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



        lfal{I = 1(7fa - X7fs)/{ -  eikxl	(215)
It is important to note that the relative motion RAO 
has entirely different asymptotic properties than 
heave. These properties are illustrated in Fig. 83 
(O'Dea, 1983), which shows a plot of the tal relative 
motion divided by the incident wave amplitude at sta­ 
tions 0-3 (on a 20-station ship) for a high-speed cargo 
ship (SL-7) model. At very long wavelengths the rel­ 
ative motion tends to zero because the ship contours 
the waves. For very short wavelengths both heave and 
pitch RAO's go to zero, and the relative motion is due 
only to the wave motion, yielding a value of around
1.0.	In between the two extremes the relative motion 
peaks, typically around a wavelength 1:0 ship-l n h
ratio of 1 to 1.5. In general the relative motion 1s 
greatest at the bow. However, as seen in the figure 
for Froude number 0.3, there are cases where the 
relative motion is greater abaft the bow. O'Dea also 
gives curves for non-head seas. For this case, the char­ 
acter of the relative motion curves is the same as Fig.



(a)	WAVE SPECTRUM
5m SIGNIFICANT WAVE HEIGHT
(m, = 1.56m2)

.;,
2


83, except that the magnitude is incr ased on the 
weather side and decreased on the lee side.
  It should be noted that the model test data 
given in Fig. 83 include certain dynamic effects 
to be discussed subsequently. So far our 
discussion of relative bow motion is based on the 
simplifying assumption that the ship and its 
motions do not affect the encountered wave, 
giving a so-called kinematic solution.
  If the RAO's for absolute or relative motions 
have been calculated and the system is assumed to 
be linear, then the corresponding responses to 
irregular seas can be determined by the methods of 
Section 4. The cal­ culation of relative bow  
motion in an irregular  sea is of particular interest. 
Fig. 84 is an example of the prediction of relative 
bow motion for the 150-m (500- ft) ship of Fig. 72 
(Section 4). In this example t e influence  of  pitcji  
i   relatively  strong  and  results m
peak values of l a/ { I in excess of 4.0 at w  = 0.6 rn:d
per sec. This is not an untypical magnitude  for a 
ship at speed in head seas. Depending upon speed 
and full­ ness the peak relative motion RAO for 
ships can vary between 2 and 5. In the example of  
Fig. 84 the effect of unity high-frequency relative 
motion RAO is slight. It becomes of more concern 
as the RAO peak induced by pitch becomes 
smaller, or as the wave spectrum peak shifts  to  
higher frequencr        .	.
  The significance of the relative motion 
response 1s that the moments of the spectrum 
provide probability measures related to 
anticipated deck wetness and bow emergence-the 
latter affecting the likelihood of s_lam­ ming-as 
discussed in the following sub-sectio!1s. 
However, in general we can expect th t 
co!Ilparative calculations of relative bow 
motion will give useful


0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8
WAVE FREQUENCY,.,

15001000  500   300   200 150	100	75
WAVE LENGTH, Lw,m

4


1.0	1.2

50	40


qualitative information on the 
seakeeping perform nce of 
alternative ship designs. It should 
be emphasized that so far we have 
considered only the simplest pos­ 
sible or kinematic, treatment of 
relative motion. Dy­ namic effects 
will be discussed under shipping 
water


(b)	RESPONSE OPERATOR
150m (500-FT)
3	SHIP AT 11.3 KNOTS


in the next sub-section.
  5.3  Shipping Water Forward.	An 
important aspect of relative bow motion is the 
probability of bow sub­


mergence  and  hence of  shipping  water  on deck, par­
 			ticularly in head seas, since this greatly affects 
attainable speed in service. Predicting the shipping of


0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8
w, RAD/SEC.

m 50


1.0


1.2


water involves the comparison 
of the relative bow mo­ tion 
previously discussed with the 
available bow free­ board. One 
approach is to compute the 
probable fraction (or 
percentage) of time that the 
foredeck is


I
'i:_40
3
.30
.;;
20

10


(c)	REL
ATIV
E 
fK)W 
MOT
ION
ffl
oz
10
m'


a
w
a
s
h
 
o
r
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
d
e
c
k
 
e
d
g
e
 
o
r
 
b
u
l
w
a
r
k
 
i
s
 
s
u
b
m
e
r
g
e
d
,
 
a
t
 
a
 
s
p
e
c
i
f
i
c
 
l
o
n
g
i
t
u
d
i
n
a
l
 
l
o
c
a
t
i
o
n
.
 
T
h
i
s
 
c
a
n
 
b
e
 
d
o
n
e
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
b
a
s
i
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
u
n
d
e
r
l
y
i
n
g
 
a
s
s
u
m
p
t
i
o
n
 
t
h
a
t
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
v
e
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
 
c
a
n
 
b
e
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
e
d
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
a
 
G
a
u
s
s
i
a
n
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
,
 
s
o
 
t
h
a
t
 
v
a
l
u
e
s
 
t
a
k
e
n
 
a
t
 
e
q
u
a
l
 
i
n
t
e
r
v
a
l
s
 
o
f
 
t
i
m
e
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
 
a
 
n
o
r
m
a
l
 
o
r
 
G
a
u
s
s
i
a
n
 
d
e
n
s
i
t
y
  
f
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
.
 
T
h
e
 
p
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
 
o
f
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
v
e
 
b
o
w
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
 
e
x
c
e
e
d
i
n
g
 
a
 
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
o
f


0	0.2	0.4	0.6	0.8
w, RAD/SEC.


1.0


1.2


freeboardF 1 , is 1 minus the 
cumulative normal dis­ 
tribution, which is readily 
obtainable from probability


Fig. 84 Relative bow motion in an irregular heod sea


tables.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	113










0.::















Q06r----
--tt-	-	---1r-----+-----+-----+---- r------t


Q
a::

l&I
la&::I
0.0 ----+-- --, ::----.P,,.	-+----+----1----+-----f






TANKER ROUTE WEATHER
0 --- --.,  ..,10.0.,. 	 --,,.2!.Q,O.,....., 	...,,.3--0-......---...,,,,-4-0.0...._,.=---
0	200	400	600	100	I000	1200	1400
...	LENGTH, L.l'T.



Fig. 85 Required bow freeboard ratio for constant probability of wetness,
P. Average of all headings


  Typical values are given in the abbreviated  Table  
18, where Jmo is the standard deviation and m 0 is the





(216)


area under the response spectrum. For example, if the 
bow freeboard is twice Jmo at the bow FJ .Jino is 2.0. 
Then the probable  fraction  of  time that  the foredeck 
is awash would be 0.0228.
  Often we are interested in the probability that an 
event such as shipping of water will occur in any par­ 
ticular cycle of motion; i.e., the probability that a peak 
response will exceed the freeboardF 1• Here we are 
concerned with the visible peaks (or maxima) of the 
record rather than equally spaced points in time. In 
most cases it may be assumed that the relative low 
motion spectrum is narrow band and that a Rayleigh 
density function will apply.
  In Section 4 it is stated that, on the basis of a Ray­ 
leigh distribution, the highest expected amplitude  in
1000 oscillations is 3.85 Jina for any  ship response,
such as relative bow motion, where m 0 is the area 
under the response variance spectrum. For a larger 
number of cycles, N, than 1000, the highest expected
value is 2m 0 In N. Hence, if we place the bow free­ 
boardF 1 equal to 2m 0 In N and solve for N we can
  

Alternatively, the cumulative Rayleigh distribution, 
whose values are the reciprocal of the right-hand side 
of Equation (216), can tell us directly the percentage 
of cycles (or maxima) in which it is to be expected that 
the deck will be wet by the sea. These are given by the 
probabilities of exceedingF 1 ,
                       (217)
  By calculating the average apparent period T., from 
Equation (52) Section 2, or assuming Tx = Tn , the result 
can be expressed in terms of number of  times per hour,
                         (218)
Table 18-Probability of Exceeding a Particular Value of a 
Gaussian (or Normal) Function
F 1 /.fmo	Probability
0.......................................0.5000
0.5.....................................   0.3085
1.0  ..................................... 0.1587
1.5.....................................   0.0668


say that the water will be expected to reach the
weather deck once in NL cycles,


2.0  ..................................... 0.0228
3.0      .....................................0.0013


114	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


The water  can  be  expected  to  reach  the  deck on the		dimensional source-panel distribution methods. A good 
average  NT  times  per  hour,  so long  as conditions re-		summary may be found in Bai and McCarthy (1979) 
main unchanged  and  the  total  number  of cycles NL is		and Noblesse and McCarthy (1983). Lee, et al (1982) 
large.		used a thin-ship theory to determine the steady wave 
Probability  techniques  have  been  applied to deter-	profile and devised an empirical formula for the pre-
mination  of  desirable  trends   in  bow freeboard  with	diction of sinkage and trim of destroyer-type  hulls 
ship  type   and  size.  For  example,  calculations  were	(Bishop and Bales, 1978) and (Tasaki, 1963).
made (Band, 1964)beginning  with relative bow motion		The actual relative motion may differ from that ob- 
for  four  lengths  of full tankers  in five different short-	tained by the simple kinematic approach because of 
crested head seas. The probability of bow submergence	the presence of the ship, as  mentioned in Section 5.2. at 
reasonable speeds in each sea was determined. Fi-  The first  effect is the  diffraction of the  incident wave nally, 
considering the frequency  of occurrence of each	system and the second is the radiation of waves caused 
sea  condition  the   combined  probability  of bow sub-	by the motions of the vessel. The change in relative 
mergence  in all head seas was calculated as a function	motion due to the diffracted and radiated wave systems 
of freeboard.  Results  are plotted in Fig. 85 in the form	is often referred to  as  dynamic  swell-up  since it  re- 
of required freeboard/length	ratio  versus ship length	suIts from the dynamics of  ship and  wave  motions. 
for different probabilities  of bow submergence  in both		Dynamic swell-up can again be determined by model 
the  North  Atlantic  and  on typical  tanker routes  (Eu-	tests. In model tests of a Mariner hull  in head  seas 
rope  or  U.S. to  Mediterranean).  In this case, absolute	(CB = 0.61), Hoffman and Maclean (1970)found a dy- 
values  are  less  important  than  trends,  and it is inter-	namic swell-up factor of 1.12 to 1.15. Experimental 
esting  to  note  that  all  of the  curves indicate approxi-	trends of swell-up are given by Journee (1976a) for 
mately  constant   required  freeboard   for ship lengths	full-load and ballast conditions of a high-speed cargo 
above about  180m (600 ft).  Hence, if a bow freeboard	ship (with bulb). It is noted that the dynamic swell-up 
of 0.05£  =  9m (30 ft) has been found  satisfactory  for	is much greater at a station 10 percent of length abaft 
600-ft  cargo   ships  it  would  appear   that   9m (30 ft)	the FP than at the FP. O'Dea (1983) and O'Dea and 
should be satisfactory  for any longer ships of the same	Jones (1983)also measured the components on a model 
type  in head seas.		of an SL-7 high-speed containership.
  However, if accurate quantitative predictions  of  Since simple general  formulas  for  all types  of ship  
shipping water for specific ships in specific seas are are not yet available, the  best  solution  in  a  specific 
needed, a detailed analysis of the  deck wetness  prob-  case appears  to be model experiments  for the  designs 
lem reveals that the effective freeboard does not equal  under  consideration.  However,  theoretical  and exper- 
the nominal freeboard, and the relative motion is al-  imental  research  continues  and  some  highlights  will 
tered by hydrodynamic effects not accounted for in the be mentioned.
simple kinematic  approach.  The  actual effective free-		Lee, O'Dea and Meyers (1982) extended the basic 
board can be considered as the sum of several com- ship motion theory, as presented in Section 3, to predict 
ponents.  The most important  is the nominal freeboard,	the vertical motions of a point in a ship relative to the 
usually  defined as the distance from the calm waterline	free surface, retaining the assumptions  of strip theory 
to the  deck or top  of the  bulwark  at  any longitudinal	and linearity. Calculations for a high-speed contain- 
location. The second is the  change  in freeboard due to	ership and a typical naval combatant were then com- 
the  sinkage  and trim  caused  by the  forward speed of	pared with model tests in head and bow seas. Results 
the   vessel.   The  forward   speed  also  creates a  calm	showed some discrepancies at the higher speed, which 
water  wave  profile  which  further   modifies the  free-	were attributed to inaccuracies in prediction of the 
board.  Tasaki   (1960) called  these   two effects static	phase relations among the incident, diffracted and ra- 
swell-up.  Finally, as introduced  by Newton (1960),the	diated wave components, and may be due in part to 
above-water   body  shape,  freeboard,  flare,  knuckles,	neglect of non-linear effects, including the influence of 
and other  special features  will alter  the necessary rel-	above-water hull form. On the other hand, the com- 
ative motion required to produce deck wetness. Al- parisons  reveal  no conclusive evidence that  the  theo- 
though  this  influence is often  considered  as a change	retical refinements in calculation  of  relative  motions 
in  effective  freeboard,  it  is  convenient  to consider it	provide much improvement compared to using only the 
here  along  with the  dynamic effects to follow.	kinematic solution.
  Static  swell-up  can  easily  be  evaluated  by  model  Beck (1982) measured  experimentally  the  radiation 
tests  in still water,  and  it  can be assumed  that  there    and diffraction components in head seas  about a math-  
is linear superposition of the ship's wave and the en- ematical hull form with parabolic waterlines. The com- 
countered wave. The theoretical prediction of static ponents were also predicted theoretically using a strip swell-
up has been extensively investigated in conjunc- theory  for the  radiated  waves and a slender-body the- tion with 
ship wave-resistance theory. Various theo- ory for  the  diffracted waves.  Researchers  have  used retical methods 
are available ranging from simple three-dimensional computations to improve the agree- slender-body theories to 
"thin-ship" theory, to three- ment between theory and experiment for the mathe-


MOTIONS IN WAVES	115

matical model. The general conclusion from the 
investigations is that the individual components taken 
separately may substantially alter the relative motion. 
However, in many cases the various components tend 
to cancel one another so that the simple kinematic 
approach gives reasonable answers.
  For example, Lloyd, et al (1979),reporting on model 
tests on a "typical modern warship" without  bulb, 
found that, "The computed relative bow  motion  ... 
with no allowance made for any distortion of the waves 
by the ship," gave reasonably good agreement with 
experimental measurements at the stem of the model.
  The effect of above-water bow shape (flare, knuckles, 
etc.) on relative motion, and hence on effective free- 
board, has been  investigated  by  several  researchers. 
In general above-water bow section shape has very 
little, if any, effect on the primary ship motions (pitch 
and heave), but the influence of flare  on deck wetness 
is more significant, although it is not clearly defined. 
O'Dea and Walden (1984) and Newton (1960) found 
that increased flare reduced deck  wetness.  On  the 
other hand, the relative motions measured by Swaan 
and Vossers (1961) and Lloyd, et al (1985) were in- 
creased as the flare increased. This was apparently 
caused by increased dynamic swell-up. The increased 
flare was effective at shielding water on either side of 
the bow. However, the increased swell-up caused  by 
the flare propagates forward as the bow pitches down 
into an approaching wave and may be responsible for 
increased shipping of water over the stem. The O'Dea 
and Walden experiments were conducted. in regular 
waves while Lloyd, et aI, used more realistic irregular 
seas; this might account for the different conclusions. 
Furthermore, O'Dea and Walden kept the same stem 
profile, while Lloyd, et aI, increased stem rake as the 
flare increased. It is possible that the differences  in 
deck wetness were caused by differences in the detailed 
design of the bows. It is obvious that non-linear effects 
are present here. Salvesen (1978b)has shown that sig- 
nificant second-order terms can be introduced without 
excessive complications.
  Although all factors affecting relative motions are 
not yet fully understood, a tentative procedure  based 
on Bales (1979)has been adopted by the U.S. Navy for 
checking bow freeboard in the contract  design  stage 
of combatant ships (NAVSEA, 1982).It makes use of 
computer calculations of motions and empirical data 
for the static and dynamic build-up, neglecting the 
influence of above-water hull form.
  Relative motions at other longitudinal locations may 
be of importance also, particularly at the stern where 
shipping water  in following seas,  or pooping,  may be 
a problem for some ships. Comparison between ex- 
periment and theory for a cargo ship hull by Journee 
(1976b) showed that, although calculated relative mo- 
tions at the stern agreed with those determined from 
measured pitch, heave and wave, the measured relative 
motions were generally ~ to ~ as great, as a result of


116	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



m2 apply to relative ship-to-wave motion near the bow 
and relative velocity, respectively. Details of calcula- 
tions to predict the occurrence of slamming in irregular 
seas are thoroughly covered by Ochi (1964) and Ochi 
and Motter (1973).
  For structural design purposes magnitudes of bot- 
tom impact pressures are needed. The prediction of 
such impact pressures is a complex problem that is far 
from a satisfactory solution. Some of the important 
factors:
  •	Relative vertical velocity at bow entry.
  •	Section shape, particularly whether bottom  is 
flat.
•	Angle between keel and wave slope at entry.
•	Area of impact on flat of bottom.
•	Duration of impact.
  In general there seems to be reasonable agreement 
between pressures obtained by two-dimensional drop 
tests and by theory,  when  theory  includes the  effect 
of entrapped air and water surface deformation. How- 
ever, hydrodynamic pressures obtained in two-dimen- 
sional experiments are consistently higher than those 
obtained in ship model tests. The difference is believed 
to be due to the effect of surface waves, air entrapment 
and three-dimensional effects. Work by Beukelman 
(1979) has shown that at forward speed impact pres- 
sures are significantly increased if there is an angle 
between the centerline of the keel and the wave sur- 
face.
  In spite of the above difficulties, two approximate 
methods of calculating impact pressures are now avail- 
able, one by Ochi and Motter (1973)for merchant hull 
forms and the other by Stavovy and Chuang (1976)for 
high-speed vehicles. The former assumes that the local 
pressure at a critical section is the product  of  the 
square of the relative vertical velocity and a  form 
factor dependent on section shape. Form factors are 
derived empirically from model tests and full-scale 
data, using Froude scaling. No account is taken  of 
angle between keel and wave slope nor  of differences 
in ship speed. The second method is applicable to V- 
shaped forms without significant flat of bottom and 
takes account of the angle between keel and wave 
slope. Because of the latter refinement, this method is 
more difficult to incorporate into conventional ship mo- 
tion calculations, but it has considerable promise for  
the future (Troesch and King, 1986).
  From the point of view of hull structural design 
(Chapter IV), impact on bow flare may be even more 
serious than bottom slamming, since the duration  of 
the impulse is longer and the dynamic magnification 
factor therefore is usually greater. Kaplan and  Sar- 
gent (1972) have presented a method for calculating 
forces due to flare entry. The applied load is computed 
on the basis of the "non-linear variations in buoyancy 
and inertial forces, over and above those used in the 
linear ship motion analysis." Results are obtained as 
time domain solutions of structural response to various



 

wave inputs, as well as rms values and other statistical 
properties. Work has also been done by Kumai and 
Tasai (1970)and O'Dea and Walden (1984).
  Pending the development of completely reliable the- 
oretical methods for predicting bottom and flare entry 
slamming, the value of direct experimental determi- 
nation of deck wetness and slamming features  of  a 
new design should be recognized (Murdey, 
1979).Such model tests in irregular waves  can  be  
considered  to be a form of analog computer solution 
in which all non-linearities are automatically taken 
into account, and a single model can be fitted with a 
number of alternative bows or bow segments. Of 
course,  wind and spray effects are not usually 
reproduced in model tests.
  5.5	Yawing   and  Broaching.	The problems of steer- 
ing and maneuvering in waves depend upon systems 
for ship control, and therefore they are discussed in 
Chapter IX, as well as in Section 3 of this chapter. 
However, since they also involve ship motions-in- 
cluding  important  non-linear behavior-they	need 
to be mentioned here.
  The interacting effects of sway, yaw and roll are 
shown mathematically in the equations of motion de- 
veloped in Section 3, which apply very well for head 
and bow seas (with rudder fixed). Only the hull lift 
effects resulting from the changing  angle  of  attack 
due to yaw and sway are not included.
  As noted in Section 3.8, early model tests in regular 
oblique bow waves revealed unexpectedly large values 
of leeway angle between the mean model heading and 
the path made good across the tank. This angle varied 
with wavelength and speed, as shown in Fig. 86. Con- 
sequently, when many wave components are present 
simultaneously, as in the case of irregular seas, a ship 
will continually change its heading to the sea unless


 





controlled by rudder action. At the same time, tests 
showed that the model also oscillated in yaw about its 
mean heading. Thus a ship or model's heading in bow 
seas changes as a result of both high-frequency yaw- 
ing and slower changes  in leeway  angle.  The former 
is affected very little by the action of the rudder and 
hence may result in unnecessary steering-gear  wear. 
But the latter depends greatly on the efficacy of steer- 
ing gear and helmsman or automatic steering system. 
Fig. 87 shows both types of change of heading in rec- 
ords taken on the Nissei Maru at sea (Exp. Tank Com- 
mittee, Japan, 1954).
  Salvesen (1974) has investigated the causes of the 
observed leeway angles in oblique waves. He  states, 
"In the horizontal modes of motion the ship will ex- 
perience steady drift motions in addition to periodic 
motions, because of the lack of hydrostatic restoring 
forces and moments in these modes. Similarly, in ir- 
regular seas a ship will experience slowly varying 
surge, sway, and yaw motions with non-zero means in 
addition to motion with frequency  components  equal 
to the frequency of encounter of the individual wave 
components ... the drift and  slowly varying  motions 
are caused by wave excitation which is of higher order 
according to the conventional formulation of ship mo- 
tion."
  Thus leeway angle in oblique seas, as well as added 
resistance at all headings, requires a more advanced 
second-order theory. He stated, "It should be recog- 
nized that the motions resulting from second order 
slowly-varying excitation can be determined from 
equations of motion which are otherwise linear be- 
cause the motions may be assumed to be linear even 
though the excitation is non-linear." Newman (1974) 
has shown, that the slowly varying exciting forces and 
moments in irregular seas, which are caused by the 
interaction between the different frequency compo- 
nents, can in some cases be approximated by the steady-
state forces in regular waves. In other cases a 
completely non-linear solution may be required, and 
research continues on the subject.
  In quartering seas, the wave-encounter frequencies 
are much lower and good steering is particularly im- 
portant. Theoretical treatment  of  this  case  requires 
the inclusion of at least coupled yaw and sway equa-



tions, for sway with forward speed induces a lateral force and 
yawing moment. Rydill (1959)has made such a study and 
evaluated the effectiveness in irregular quartering seas of 
various  rudder-control  parameters in  the   automatic steering  
system-heading,	rate of change 
of heading, and integral of heading change. Korvin-
Kroukovsky has pointed out, however, that an important factor 
not included in Rydill's treatment is  the effect of other modes 
of motion on the coefficients in the equations of yaw-sway. 
Pitching  in particular has a large cyclical effect on lateral 
coefficients, as the underwater profile is continually changing 
as bow and stern pitch in and out of the waves. This effect is 
not allowed for in a linear theory.
  At very low encounter frequencies, Le., when the wave and 
ship speeds are nearly equal, the danger of loss of control and 
broaching arises. Here the pres- sures may actually turn the 
ship broadside  to  the waves, and excessive rolling or 
structural damage, or even the capsizing of small vessels, may 
result. This phenomenon was investigated as a quasi-static phe- 
nomenon by Davidson (1948)and later by Grim (1963), who 
concluded that nonlinear surging, as well as sway- ing and 
yawing, plays an important  part.  He  found that broaching is 
more probable for a ship that is unstable on course in calm 
water than for one that is stable.
  The theoretical approach of Paulling, et al (1974), also Chou, 
Oakley, Paulling, et al (1974)is particularly promising. Quoting 
from Salvesen (1978b), HJ. R. Paulling has worked for several 
years on the nonlinear problem of large-amplitude ship motions 
in following and quartering waves. With the assistance of some 
of his students, he has developed a time-domain numer- ical 
simulation technique ... which has been used to predict even 
the very nonlinear phenomena of capsiz- ing. In this method 
the forces due to body-generated waves (i.e., added mass, 
damping, and diffraction) are assumed to be small due to the 
low encounter fre- quency and therefore are estimated very 
crudely; the hydrostatic forces are assumed to dominate the 
prob- lem and are computed to a high order of accuracy for the 
actual instantaneous submerged hull shape. The good 
agreement between computational and experi- mental results 
shown seems to indicate that this time-


118	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



domain numerical method may not only be a useful 
tool for predicting capsizing but it may also be useful 
for the general dynamical problem of ship motions and 
course-keeping at low encounter  frequencies."  Work 
in Japan was also reported in the Proceedings of Sta­ 
bility '81 and subsequent conferences.
  5.6	Added resistance. The increase in  required 
power resulting from ship motions in heavy seas arises 
from the combined effect of several factors:
(a)	Added resistance caused by
    •	Direct wind and wave action.
    •	Indirect effect of waves associated with ship 
motions (all six components).
•	Rudder action.
(b)	Reduced propulsive efficiency caused by
•	Increased propeller loading.


sistance to be primarily the result of the 
damping waves radiated from the oscillating 
ship's hull. The method is simpler to use than 
other  methods,  but  is not applicable to the 
case of the relatively small added resistance 
due to waves that are too short to cause 
appreciable ship motions. Model tests by 
Strom-Tejsen, et al (1973) on Series 60 
models (0.60 and 0.70 block coefficients) 
and a destroyer hull showed better agree­ 
ment with Gerritsma and Beukelman (1972) 
than with other theories investigated (Maruo, 
1957) and (Joosen, 1966).
  Equating added resistance to energy 
radiated by the pitching and heaving ship, 
Gerritsma and Beukelman (1972) arrived 
at the simple relation for a ship in reg­ ular 
head seas,
J


•	Propeller racing or air drawing.
•	Unsteady propeller effects.


(8R)  = (,r I Lw w,)	b(x) lRlf  2(x) 
dx	(221)


•	Reduced hull efficiency.
  Added resistance will be discussed here; factors in­ 
volving propulsive efficiency are discussed in Section
5.7.	The resistance caused by wind is discussed in Chap­
ter V, Vol. II.
  When a ship is subjected to pitching and heaving, 
the effect of the motions on resistance may be consid­ 
erable. Havelock (1945) first investigated this problem, 
and more recently Maruo (1957) developed an advanced 
theory.
  Vossers (1962) summarized this and other work by 
explaining that the added resistance in head seas may 
be considered to be made up of three compone1;1ts:
  (a)	One corresponding to that experienced by a ship 
forced to oscillate in calm water, generating damping 
waves that dissipate energy.
(b)	Another caused by the phase shift between wave


where g is the scalar amplitude of relative 
vertical velocity at any section between ship 
and wave surface as a function of x and b(x) 
is the sectional  value  of total damping 
coefficient. Using the notation of Section 3,
          b(x)  = b33 ( x ) -    U 0  (d  a 33 (x) / dx)
	(222
)
where a33 (x ) and b33 (x ) are sectional heave 
virtual mass and damping coefficients, 
respectively. The sec­ ond term involving U0 
, the ship forward speed, is what Korvin-
Kroukovsky, et al (1957) referred to as dy­ 
namic damping.
  Assuming  a33   goes to zero at  the ends of  
the ship, after partial differentiation and 
substitution, the mean
added resistance at U0 and Cl.I, becomes
J


excitation and ship motions, analogous to the power 
loss in an alternating-current circuit associated with


(8R)   = (1r!Lww,)  X	[basCx)lfRI


phase shift between voltage and current.
  (c)	One resulting from the reflection and refraction 
of oncoming waves by the ship.
  Maruo (1957) reached the following conclusions, 
which seem valid for head seas even though his equa­ 
tions have not been fully substantiated for general 
use:
  (a)	The excess resistance is independent of the still 
water resistance.
  (b)	The additional resistance is proportional to the 
square of the wave height.
  (c)	The pitching motion has a dominating effect upon 
the resistance increase.
  (d)	The direct effect of the reflection of  sea waves  
is comparatively small.
  (e)	The maximum increase of resistance occurs at a 
slightly higher speed than that for  pitch synchronism, 
if the natural pitching period is longer than the natural 
heaving period.
  A comparatively simple theoretical approach by Ger­ 
ritsma and Beukelman (1972) considered the added re-


+ 2Uo aas(X) dlfRI I dx] i!Ridx	(223)
  Since lei represents the amplitude of 
relative veloc­ ity, it must be calculated by 
combining the effects of pitch, heave and 
wave elevation, considering their phase 
relations, as discussed in Section 5.2. A 
dynamic factor is also introduced and 
applied to the encountered wave height to 
correct for refraction effects resulting from 
the distortion of the incident waves by the 
pres­ ence of the ship.
  Salvesen (1978a) has presented another 
theory in which second-order effects are 
expressed as a product of first-order terms 
that are all computed by programs 
presently in use for predicting linear 
heave and pitch motions. Furthermore, 
the theory applies to oblique waves as 
well as head seas. Comparisons were 
made
between theory and experiment in head seas 
for Series 60 hulls (C8     = 0.60, 0.70, 0.80) 
for a destroyer at  Fn
=  0.25 and  0.35 and  for  a  high-speed, bulbous-bow
form  at  Fn  = 0.20  -   0.50. In a few cases the  new


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	119


theory was not quite as good as that of Gerritsma / 
Beukelman (1972) (destroyer hull at low speed), but in 
other cases it was much better (fine Series 60 models). 
Others contributing to the subject of added resist­ 
ance in waves have been Vossers (1961), Joosen (1966), 
Newman (1967), Lee and Newman (1971), Lin and Reed



estimator for the mean value since it is of primary 
practical interest.
  The usual estimator for the mean value of added 
resistance, (6Rw), or drift force, in irregular seas 
takes the form
J


(1976), Dalzell and Kim (1976), and Ankudinov (1972).
The  most significant aspect of  all theories is that, in


(6Rw)  = 2	[6 R(we)/{ 2]  S, (w,) dwe	(224)


regular waves of any particular length, the added re­ 
sistance is proportional to the square of wave height. 
This is highly significant, for it means that the principle 
of superposition can be applied to added resistance in 
irregular waves, as well as to ship motions. The su­ 
perposition principle for the mean added resistance (or 
drift force or moment) was first noted without elabo­ 
ration by Maruo (1957). Early experimental validation 
was carried out by Kawashima, et al (1959) and Ger­ 
ritsma, et al (1961). Later Hasselmann (1966) and Vas­ 
silopoulos (1966) pointed out that the basic result could 
be explained in terms of the theory of quadratic, non­ 
linear systems. Though this latter  theory  has  been 
used to develop approaches for other statistics (Dalzell, 
1976) (Pinkster, 1980), we will concentrate upon the

---	HEAD SEAS
- --BEAM SEAS
----- FOLLOWING SEAS


This estimator has a strong, but entirely 
coincidental, resemblance to that for the variance of 
a linear re­ sponse (Section 4). The mean value on 
the left-hand side is a statistical mean, conceptually 
the result of averaging the fluctuations in added 
resistance or drift force over a very long time under 
sjatistically station­ ary conditions. The factor 
(6R(we)/ {2] in the integrand is the normalized mean 
value of added resistance in regular w es of 
encounter frequency w, and scalar amplitude { . 
(Head, bow or beam seas are assumed if the ship is 
at speed). This added resistance or drift force 
operator is sometimes called an RAO, but it is to be 
noted that the normalization is by the square rather 
than the first power of wave amplitude, as in the 
linear case, and the entire quantity is not squared in 
the integral. The factor S, (w.) in the integrand is the 
encountered variance spectrum of wave elevation 
defined, as in Section 4, so that the area over 
positive
DHP






























12	14	11


18
V,KNOTS


20	22


Fig. 88 Service performance of Dart Europe in full load condition (Aertssen and van Sluijs, 1972)


120	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


frequency  is equal  to the  variance.  The leading factor  times in irregular  waves but usually in regular  waves, 
of 2 falls out of the derivation for the statistical mean, with  calculation  of  power  in irregular  waves  by  su-  
and is not to be confused with the various multipliers perposition.
for  significant  amplitudes  noted  previously.   If  the   (b)  Measurement  or calculation of added resistance, 
mean value has units  of force F, and the  wave  spec-  estimation  of  propulsion  factors  and  calculation  of  
trum has units of (£2 X T) (wjlere Tis time), the added power and rate of rotation in waves, using these val- 
resistance operator [8R(w.) / ,2] must have units of F / ues.
£2),  and accordingly the integrand  must have units  of       For  many years  some model basins  have made use   
(F X T), which are not those of a variance spectrum. of self-propelled model tests  in regular  waves  for  lim- 
While the integrand can be, and often is, called a spec- ited comparative purposes (for example, Kempf, 1934). 
tru~ of added resistance or dri~t force, it is not  a  Such tests  repeated  for  many  different conditions can 
vanance spectrum and cannot be mterpreted as such. provide an indication of the effect of speed, heading,
  Hence, it is possible to compute the added resistance  and  wavelength  on added power  requirements  in reg- 
in different representative sea conditions at various ular  waves, as  shown in Fig. 89 (Vossers  and Swaan,  
speeds and prepare  rough-sea  resistance  curves  for  1960).(Added power  in quartering  and following seas 
each condition. Furthermore, Gerritsma, et al (1961) was found to be insignificant).
have found  that,  as  shown  in  the  next  subsection,  Of course,  power  is  not  usually  measured  directly 
added thrust and torque can be estimated in the same in  self-propelled  model tests,  but  is  calculated  from  
way.	measured mean torque and rate of rotation, since PD
Rolling  presumably   increases  resistance,   particu-	=  21TQn, where  PD   is in kW if  Q is in kNm and n is
larly when bilge keels are fitted, although little quan-		in RPS. It is customary to carry out tests in regular 
titative  data  are available. Anti-rolling devices may be		waves at model self-propulsion point and to maintain 
expected  to  have  a net  favorable  effect on powering,		constant shaft rotation throughout each test run in 
particularly  if they are internal  types that  do not have		waves, but for accurate evaluation of performance it 
their own drag.		is necessary to take account of the response of the 
Yawing and swaying in oblique seas, with the related	power plant itself. Reciprocating steam engines and 
rudder  action, also increase  resistance,  but  this effect		diesel engines produce essentially  constant torque, so 
is  relatively  minor.  A  more  important   aspect is the		that as RPM is reduced by added resistance, the power 
leeway  angle  that  is experienced  in bow seas, which,		falls off. Geared-turbine and electric drive, on the other 
as  noted  in the  preceding  sub-section, give  rise to an		hand, produce essentially constant power as RPM is 
induced  drag  of appreciable magnitude.		reduced. Hence, the nature of the  power plant has a 
An  important  consideration,  especially  for snip op-	great deal to do with the power and speed that can be 
eration,  is  resistance   at  oblique  headings  to waves,		maintained. A more satisfactory approach than con- 
since it is often desirable to compare a change of course		stant-rotation testing was described by Nakamura and 
with  a speed  reduction.  Furthermore,   to obtain accu-		Fujii (1977).A speed control was built that enables the 
rate  calculations  of  added  resistance in short-crested		engine  characteristics   to  be  simulated  during model
seas, the effect of different directional wave  compo-  tests,  i.e., constant  RPM, constant  torque  or constant 
nents is needed. Some experimental work  along  this  power.  Results  are  presented  of  tests  on  a  contain-  
line has  been  done, as  for  example  a  study  by  Fujii  ership  model in  regular  and  irregular  head  seas  in 
and Takahashi (1975)on resistance increase in oblique which speed  reduction  was  determined  under  either 
seas. Such oblique wave tests require rather complex constant torque (decreasing power) or constant RPM 
instrumentation, as discussed in the Proceedings of (increasing power). The experimental approach is rec-
rrrc '78. The added resistance, as well as the sideways ommended as the most direct way to obtain the data
drift force, was derived theoretically by N. Salvesen needed to evaluate attainable sea speed under different 
(1974) (1978), as well as by Maruo (1963).	irregular sea conditions.
  5.7	Powering    in    Waves.	Fig.   88,  derived  from		The report of the ITl'C Seakeeping Committee (1978) 
Aertssen  and  van  Sluijs (1972), gives  a broad overall	discusses the relative merits of the above direct power 
picture  obtained  from  service records of speed-power	measurements	in waves and the so-called thrust 
relationships  in rough  seas  for  a large containership.	method, which uses thrust increase measured on a self- 
It shows a series  of average  power curves correspond-	propelled model in waves together with propulsion fac- 
ing to different  degrees  of sea  severity. The limit lines	tors from overload tests in calm water. No conclusion 
indicate the  upper  limits of attainable  speed (based on	could be reached other than a  recommendation  that 
wet  decks,  slamming,  etc.) that  provide cut-off points	work be continued and  no  significant  changes  have 
on each  power  curve.  The plot  also  shows the effect	been made in  subsequent  conferences.  A  survey  of 
of ship's  heading  to the waves.	alternative test methods was given by Day, Reed, and
  Two basic approaches  have been used for estimation	Lin (1977) along with a description of the technique  
of power  requirements   in rough seas:	then in use at DTRC.
(a)  Direct   self-propelled  testing   in  waves,  some-	The second method for determining power required


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	121











i






30










120"	150"
P.w





























120-	150•
,t'w



assumption has 
been used 
satisfactorily to 
provide en­ 
gineering solutions 
(Journee, 1976), 
there is evidence 
(Nakamura and 
Naito, 1977) that 
the propulsion fac­ 
tors in waves are 
not the same as in 
calm water. These 
differences are 
most marked for 
models of ships 
tested at ballast 
drafts and therefore 
may be due to air 
draw­ ing. More 
study of propulsion 
factors is clearly 
needed. 
Nevertheless, 
assuming that 
propulsion factors 
can be determined 
by overload self-
propelled tests in 
calm water, the 
added power in 
regular wave trains 
can be 
approximated.
  Coming to the 
problem of added 
power in irregular 
waves, we find that 
knowing  the  added  
torque,  rate of 
rotation and power 
in regular waves, 
obtained either by 
model tests or 
calculations, it is 
possible to deter­ 
mine mean values of 
these quantities in  
irregular waves. 
They are determined 
for any specific 
wave spec­ trum in 
the same manner as 
that used for added 
re­ sistance (Section 
5.6).
  Fig. 90 shows 
graphically a typical 
calculation of added 
power for two ships 
of different sizes in 
non­ dimensional 
form. The influence 
of spectrum shape is 
clearly presented. 
The log-slope form 
of plotting was used 
in this figure, with 
an added power 
operator, normalized 
by the square of the 
scalar wave 
amplitude, as given 
by


Fig. 89   Power increase in waves for a Victory type ship model as a function
of  wave  length,  ship heading, and  Froude No. (Vossen  and Swaan, 1960)


in a seaway-a direct calculation procedure without 
model tests in waves-is the ultimate goal. This in­ 
volves first the calculation of added resistance due to 
waves (Section 5.6) and wind resistance (Chapter V, 
Vol II). But added resistance model tests can be used. 
Then it is necessary to estimate the propulsion factors 
in waves, i.e., wake, thrust deduction and relative ro­ 
tative efficiency. Gerritsma (1976) states that, "Exper­ 
iments by Goeman, who used a forced oscillating ship 
model with a propeller running at constant speed, have 
shown that the influence of frequency of motion on 
the mean thrust and power is very small and can be 
neglected for practical purposes, when the propeller 
does not suffer from air suction. Thus for the sustained 
sea speed calculation only the decrease of efficiency


where n: is a non-dimensional coefficient of added 
power, BP, derived from one given by Gerritsma, et 
al (1961),
n: = BP / pgB2LV
	(225
)
Hence, with w 2 I g = 21T! L,,,, the scalar operator's
                      (226)
  But the common (dimensional) plot, on the basis of 
w, is equally suitable. The added power operator  is 
then of the form,
BP!f,2
Mean added power in irregular long-crested head seas 
is, in form similar to Equation (224) for mean added 
resistance,
J


due to the higher loading is of interest, provided that 
extreme conditions are excluded." However, recent


(BPn) = 2	[BP (w.)/°{2] S,(w.) dw,	(227)


open-water propeller tests at the University of Mich­ 
igan yielded a 5 to 10 percent change in Kr and Ka. 
Finally propeller characteristic curves are used to de­ 
termine propeller efficiency under the overload condi­ 
tion.
  However, Murdey (1979) says that it is usually as 
sumed that all of the above propulsion factors are "the 
same as in calm water with the propeller loading the 
same as the average loading in waves." Although this
  

Thus it is clear that systematic self-propelled 
model tests or calculations for different speeds and 
headings (head and bow seas) make it possible to 
predict rough curves of sea speed vs. power for 
various represen­ tative ocean wave spectra similar 
to Aertssen's curves, Fig. 88. These curves can be of 
great value in esti­ mating the maximum required 
power in service, or service power factor, for a new 
ship design as dis­ cussed in Section 8.


122	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 



5.8	Wave loads.
  (a)	General.	Although wave loads enter implicitly 
into the calculation of ship motions, they are consid- 
ered here under the heading of derived responses be- 
cause, in order to determine the loads at a particular 
instant of time, a solution to the  ship motions  must 
first be obtained.
  There are three different levels at which wave loads 
may be needed for structural design purposes:
  1.	Instantaneous local hydrodynamic pressures on 
the surface of the hull as a result of ship motions and 
ship-wave interactions. These pressures may be needed 
over the entire hull surface or only some portion of it.
  2.	Integrated instantaneous pressures yielding the 
longitudinal and torsional bending moments and shear 
force at midships or other stations.
  3.	Impulsive pressures on local areas of the hull (flat 
bottom, flare, sponson, or stern) which can cause vi- 
bratory hull response (slamming, whipping, springing). 
See Section 5.4 and Chapter IV, Vol I.
  (b)	Local Pressures.	The introduction of finite ele- 
ment structural analysis techniques has given impetus 
to the development of methods of calculating the dis- 
tribution of instantaneous hydrodynamic  pressures 
over individual sections and hence over the entire sur- 
face of a hull oscillating in waves. It was shown in 
Section 3 that the calculation of ship motions requires


the determination of hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
pressures  over the  surface  of the  hull. Hence, there  
is no basically difficult problem in determining these 
pressures at a particular instant in time, with the ship  
in any desired position relative to an encountered reg- 
ular wave.
  Hoffman (1966)and Tasai (1966)simultaneously, but 
separately, published papers showing the methods to 
compute the wave-induced pressures on the hull sur- 
face of a ship heaving and pitching in regular longi- 
tudinal waves. Hoffman also measured the pressure 
distribution on a T-2 tanker model, and found that the 
experimental results had good agreement with theo- 
retical calculations.
  (c)	Wave Bending  Moments.	The ship motion 
the- ory of Section 3 can be extended to permit the 
calcu- lation	of	wave-induced
	shearing	forces	and 
longitudinal bending moments on the hull girder.  First 
it is necessary to solve the equations of motion for the 
motion amplitudes. Then one can evaluate the incre- 
mental vertical forces (in excess of or less than the 
still-water buoyant force) acting at any instant of time 
along the length of the ship. The shear and bending 
moment in regular waves were shown to be the  result 
of integrating vertical hydrodynamic pressures and 
inertia (D'Alembert) forces over the ship length at a 
fixed time (Jacobs, 1958). The work explained experi- 
mental observations of the reduction in dynamic wave 
bending moments on the basis of two factors: The so- 
called Smith effect, which accounts for the pressure 
reduction in a wave crest and increase in a trough 
resulting from the orbital motion of  wave  particles, 
and a second effect of comparable magnitude resulting 
from ship-wave interaction (Salvesen, et al 1970).
  The study of longitudinal wave-induced shear and 
bending moments in irregular seas according to the 
linear-random theory (assuming bending moment am- 
plitude proportional to wave amplitude) has had im- 
portant consequences in the strength  standards  for 
large ships, as discussed in Chapter IV, V011. Bending 
moment RAO's in terms of scalar moment/unit wave 
amplitude tend toward zero for both very low and very 
high frequencies. They often are  "double  humped," 
i.e., one peak corresponding to a motions resonance, 
and another to the wavelength that produces the great- 
est re-distribution of buoyancy (Moor, 
1966).Prediction of statistical parameters according to 
methods illus- trated in Section 4.1 is one of the 
important steps in calculating short-term magnitudes 
and in the synthesis of long-term trends for design 
purposes.
  A revealing early study of bending moments  used 
the log-slope form of presentation to show clearly the 
effect of size alone on ships in the same seaway. To 
carry out the prediction of bending moments in irreg- 
ular waves in this way, wave bending moment may in 
regular waves be expressed  in nondimensional  form 
by dividing by maximum wave slope, giving a bending 
moment operator,



-3	--   .......    JJ.w•o·


MOTIONS  IN  
WAVES	123
sea 
condi
tions 
to 
obtai
n 
long-
term 
proba
bility 
trend
s are 
discu
ssed 
in 
Chap
ter 
IV, 
Vol. 
I.


..C..
,..,.


.,.'..
t45
°


'	t  
22, 1;


DI
RE
CT
IO
NA
L
SE
A 
SP
EC
TR
UM


(d)	S
p
r
i
n
g
i
n
g
.
	
A
n
 
i
m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
s
e
a
 
w
a
v
e
s
on 
so
m
e 
sh
ip
s 
is 
th
e 
ex
cit
ati
on 
of 
ra
nd
o
m 
hu
ll 
vi
br
ati
on


V)                               ------
ts1,,: ....
..
7.7,_,,..,.
u,\	





lr1w
SHIP LENGTH~ METERS
90	180    275 365










lnW


that may 
continue for 
extended 
periods of 
time. This 
phenomenon, 
known as 
springing, has 
been noticed 
particularly in 
Great Lakes 
bulk carriers 
(Matthews, 
1967), but it 
has also been 
reported on 
large ocean­ 
going ships of 
full form 
(Goodman, 
1971). The 
spring­ ing 
excitation and 
response can 
be treated as 
stochastic 
processes that 
can be handled 
by the 
techniques 
dis­ cussed in 
Section 4. 
However, it 
has been 
shown by 
Kumai (1972) 
and Troesch 
(1984b) that 
longer waves 
in the 
spectrum can 
also excite the 
hull vibration. 
This 
introduces 
non-linear 
aspects that 
are important 
to consider 
here.
  Experiments 
in waves were 
carried out by 
Troesch 
(1984a) on a 
model jointed 
amidships, to 
measure both 
wave 
excitation and 
springing 
response. He 
found that if 
the  incident  
wave  
amplitude  is  
given  as  ((t)  
= ( cos (w.t), 
then "there is a 
measurable 
springing ex­ 
citation at 2w. 
and, 
some_iimes 
3w•. Here w. 
is the 
encounter 
frequency and 
( is the 
incident wave 
am­ plitude. 
Should 2w. or 
3w. equal wn, 
the natural fre­ 
quency of the 
hull, there will 
be a large 
increase in
the springing 
response. This 
non-linear 
respO!,!Se is 
quadratic in 
wave 
amplitude. In 
other words, if 
( dou­ bles, 
then the 
response 
increases by a 
factor of four." 
Furthermore, 
wave 
components at 
one frequency 
will interact 
with 
components at 
other 
frequencies. A 
good 
description of 
the theory is 
given by 
Longuet-
Higgins 
(1963), who 
said, "The 
implication for 
ship springing 
is that, in 
addition to the 
long-wave 
excitation 
resulting from 
2w. and 3w., 
there will also 
be long-wave 
exci­
tation at wn 
from w; + w1 = 
wn, where w; 
and w1 are 
frequencies of 
first-order 
wave 
components."
  Summarizin
g, the response 
at Ct>n is the 
result of the 
following 
sources of 
excitation:
  1.	Waves 
with a frequency 
of wn. (This is 
the linear


Fig. 91 Prediction of bending moments for Series 60 Ships of various lengths
in a severe short-crested head sea


case).
2.	Waves with a frequency of w1 , where 2w1


= w,..





CBM 
(w2/g)
where C8 M is a nondimensional bending moment coef­ 
ficient,
  Fig. 91 summarizes graphically the calculation of 
wave bending moments in a severe irregular short­ 
crested head sea for a family of geometrically similar 
ships of 0.80 block coefficient. From the bending mo­ 
ment spectra at the bottom of the figure one can com­


(This is the non-linear excitation due to harmonics of 
long waves).
  3.	Waves with encounter frequencies of Ct>; and w 
where Ct>; + w1 = w,.. (This is also a non-linear 
exci­ tation caused by the interaction of two 
different wave
components).
  Jensen and Pedersen (1981) give the total 
bending moment response as follows:
m(x, t)  = m <1>  (x, t)  + m <2>   (x, t) + ...	(228)
where  m<1  (x, t)  is  the  linear  moment  due  to  wave


pute the average short-term bending  moments  for 
ships of all lengths or the highest expected bending 
moments in 10,000 cycles, for example. However, it 
should be emphasized that trends here apply only to 
geometrically similar ships with similar weight distri­ 
bution. Methods of taking into account many different


excitation  as  previously  described  in 1, and  m <2>   (x,   
t) is the non-linear moment due to wave excitation de­ 
scribed by 2. and 3. They next show  how  a spectrum 
of bending moment can be calculated  if the spectrum 
of the incident wave is known and if the bending mo­ 
ment response amplitude operator (RAO) is given or


124	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



can be determined. The RAO is the bending moment 
due to waves of unit amplitude and may include the 
effects of non-linearities, which requires iterative pro­ 
cedures to be followed. The bending moment spectrum 
would then include both linear and non-linear parts.
  Troesch (1984a) determined springing excitation ex­ 
perimentally for a Great Lakes bulk carrier, which 
showed an oscillatory character when plotted against 
encounter frequency. (Peaks correspond to wave 
lengths such that forces at bow  and  stern  reinforce 
one another). The complete solution to the springing 
problem requires consideration of the hull structural 
properties as well as the hydrodynamic excitation 
(Chapter IV, Vol. I).
  (e)	Forces due to ship motions. The local forces 
acting upon parts of a vessel subject to motions in 
waves consist primarily of inertial reactions (d'Alem­ 
bert forces) which depend on the accelerations dis­ 
cussed in Section 5.1. In addition, angular motions 
produce changes in the direction of the gravity forces, 
which affect the components along the three ship axes. 
In general, determining these forces for a ship in reg­ 
ular waves permits statistical estimates to be made of



TANGENTIAL
D'ALEMBERT



























COMP.


the local forces in irregular seas according to the spec­ 
tral method. Before considering these, however, it is 
important to note that the time-honored deterministic 
approach for a ship subject only to rolling in regular 
beam seas can provide useful approximation for some 
purposes and is thus worth repeating at this point. All 
parts of a rolling ship are acted upon by two inertial 
reactions (d'Alembert forces) in addition to  gravity; 
viz., a centrifugal force and a tangential force.  The 
force of gravity may be resolved into components par­ 
allel and perpendicular to the centerline plane of the 
ship. These components are equal, respectively, to w 
cos cj> and w sin cj>, where w is the weight of the part. 
See Fig. 92.
  The centrifugal force, which acts radially away from 
the axis of roll, is equal to (wig) 4>2 r, where 4> is the 
angular velocity of the ship and r is the distance from 
the axis of roll to the cen r of gravity of the part 
under consideration. Since </> is seldom greater than
0.15 radian per sec, the centrifugal force is usually 
negligible in magnitude. For example, if 4> is 0.1 radian 
per sec and r is 150 ft, the centrifugal  force is about 
5 percent of w. If the center of gravity of the part is 
above the CG of the ship, the centrifugal force opposes 
the gravity component w cos </> and therefore reduces 
the force on the supports. Since the static downward 
force on the supports when the ship is not rolling is 
w, the effect of centrifugal force is to reduce this force 
by a small amount. It should be noted that 4> and 
consequently  the centrifugal force has its maximum
value  wh n  the  rolling  ship is  upright  (</>  = 0). The
value of  </> when  </> is zero, is w  </>A     where  cf>A   is the 
maximum angle of roll in radians. The angular velocity 
of roll and centrifugal force are zero where </> = <f> A. 
The tangential force is an inertial reaction to the


Fig. 92 Forces due to rolling (at maximum angle)


angular acceleration of the ship, which is a maximum 
when </> = <f> A. Its maximum value then is w2 </>A where
<f>A is in radians. The linear acceleration acts in a 
di­ rection normal to the radius that connects the 
center of gravity of the part to the axis of roll, 
usually as­ sumed to be through the center of gravity 
of the ship. The maximum value of the tangential 
acceleration is r  c,,2  </>A     and  therefore  when  </> =  </> 
A  the  tangential force is (wlg)r X w2 </>A (Fig. 92).
  In designing foundations or restraining devices 
the main interest is in the transverse components 
(parallel to the deck) of the tangential and gravity 
forces. In general, the transverse component of the 
tangential
force  is obtained  by substituting  z for  r,  where  z is
the height of the part above the CG (assumed rolling 
center), using ship axes. (Determining the true rolling 
center is discussed in Section 3.8.) Combining this 
transverse component with the transverse gravity 
component, w sin <f>A, gives the total transverse force 
acting at any point on a rolling ship as
- (wig) w2 <f>A ± w sin </>A	(229)
If the center of  gravity  of  the  part is above  the  CG 
of the ship, this force acts in the same direction as  the 
w sin cj>A component of the force of gravity: if the part 
is below the CG the reverse is true. This explains the 
greater likelihood of cargo shifting in the 'tween decks 
than in the hold.
  A numerical example. A gun turret mounted on 
the centerline of a naval vessel has its center of 
gravity at a height of 9 m above the waterline. The 
turret's mass is 1000 kg. The period of roll is 15 sec. 
Calculate the transverse reaction on the turret 
foundation when


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	125


the ship is rolling to	maximu inclination of.30 deg 
assuming that the axis of roll 1s at the waterlme.


- c.i>, ('rf1 +:f'r}s - 'ff 'ifs)
g


cf>A =


1r
180


x	30d eg =


1r rad1' ans


Late
ral:



••	(I) 2_
gzlg= --•
gg



(230)


Maximum tangential force
= 1000 X ( l



41r2	1T
) 2 XG X 9 = 827 kN





Vertical:


- w. ('rf2 + 'ifs - °Z'rf4)
g

gal g = --• gs=


Transverse component of  weight (g  =  9.81 m/sec2)	g
= 1000  X  9.81  X  0.5  = 4905 kN	2


Maximum transverse reaction	= 5732 kN
  In addition to this reaction the foundation bears a 
transverse moment that is equal to the maximum 
transverse force times the height of the center of grav­ 
ity of the turret above the top of the foundation.
  The more general approach to the same problem, 
involving irregular waves and all modes of motion, 
follows the linear random theory discussed in Section 
4, including the estimation of ext:reme value . The only 
different aspect is the construction of RAO s or force 
operators relating force amplitudes to wave ampli­ 
tudes. The "forces" are the sum of gravity components 
and inertial reactions dependent upon the mass, m, of 
the  component  under  consideration  and  its accelera-
tion,  a; i.e.,  F  = ma =	a  = w  .   where  w is the
                       g	g	.	. 
weight of the element and al g  is the acceleration  m 
g's.  Hence,  the inertial  reaction  may  be  expressed as
the product of the weight of the element, w, and an 
effective acceleration in g's. The usual final scalar force 
operator is computed in g's and may be interpreted as 
the amplitude of acceleration in g's per unit wave am­ 
plitude per unit element weight. With an operator so 
defined the measures of response computed for irreg­ 
ular waves by means of the methods of Section 4 will 
be in the nature of effective accelerations in g's which 
may then be applied to the weight of the element of 
interest. However, it is important to bear in mind that 
what is desired is the effect of the vector sum of a 
gravitational component and an acceleration in some 
direction.
  The derivation of the RAOs for force per unit weight 
proceeds as follows. It is first assumed that the basic 
complex ship motion amplitudes of Sections 3, 4 and
5.2 (1f1 ••• 1j"6) are obtained per unit regular wave am-
plitude, as a function of freq ncy. Thus following 
Equations (208) and (209), retammg the comp!ex n?"" 
tation, and dividing by g to express accelerations m 
g's, the complex amplitudes  of  the th ee compon n 
of acceleration at a point (x, y, z) relative to the ongm 
of the ship coordinate system may be written:


-  w. ('rfa + Y	- i);)
g
The first two components above include the tangential 
acceleration components that determine the inertial 
reactions due to pitch and roll in the conventional anal­ 
ysis, and the third includes modificatio_ns	the heave 
acceleration  due·  to  pitch  and  roll  which,  m  the end, 
determines a "virtual weight." The expressions are 
more complicated than those given in the simpler anal­ 
ysis because they take into account the in_fluence. of 
heave, sway, surge, pitch and yaw accelerations which 
are neglected in simplified analyse . 11!- a sense, th 
expression for the lateral a celeration _is less co p 1- 
cated than that of the simplified analysis because 1t 1s 
linearized and uses complex notation with a consistent 
coordinate system. The lateral acceleration ssociated 
with the centrifugal force can be neglected m the con­ 
struction of the RAO's because it is nonlinear, and in 
any event small.
  The gravitational component is accounted for next. 
In the simpler analysis the lateral component of force 
on a part of  the ship due to gravity  and  a  roll _angle 
cf> is w sin cf>. Linearizing, this becomes w<(>, _or J st cf> 
in terms of an increase in lateral force per umt weight. 
The complex amplitude of roll, 7f4 , corresponds to the 
negative of the complex amplitude of _the l teral_ 
com­ ponent of (gravitational force per umt weight) 1f 
the axis sense conventions of Section 3 are observed. 
Ob­ serving the axis conventions of Section 3 in a 
similar fashion, the complex amplitude of pitch (7fs) 
corre­ sponds to the complex amplitude of th lon itudin 
l component of (gravitational force per umt weight). Fi­ 
nally, the change in  the  vertical  gravitati  nal  force 
per unit weight) due to roll and pitch, rela_!1ve to_!he 
static lg case, is of the order _of (1  -   cos \'1141C?S l1Jsl), 
which is zero to the present hnear approximation.
To construct the force-per-unit-weight RAO's the
signs of the acceleration conwon nts of Eq ati n ( 30) 
are changed in accordance with d Alembert s principle, 
and added to the complex amplitudes of the gravita­ 
tional components noted above the absolute values of 
the results are taken to yield the scalar amplitu es of 
force per unit weight for the re lar wave an_iphtud ,



••
Longitudinal:	1 /g =



(1)2-
g1 =


,, assumed in the 
original motions comp 
tation.§. Di­ viding 
these results by the 
wave amplitude, t the 
RAO's for force per unit 
weight then become:


 



Section 6
Control of  Ship  Motions 12
  6.1	General.    The reasons  for  attempting to control	ships that are being rebuilt or modified for some task 
and  reduce  the  motions of a ship are  as  varied as the	not anticipated in their original design.
types  of ships. Excessive motions would interfere with		In light of the foregoing discussion, it is appropriate 
the  recreational   activities  of  passengers   on a cruise	to ask what motions can be sensibly influenced by a 
ship.  Often  more  than  half  of  the  load of a contain-	small addition to the ship. Let us first consider the 
ership  is stowed  above  deck where  it  is subjected to	unrestored (horizontal) motions of the ship: sway, yaw 
large  accelerations  due to  rolling.  In some situations	and surge. These motions exhibit no resonance, and 
this  may cause  some internal  damage  to the contents	their amplitudes in deep water are never greater  than 
of the  containers;  in more  severe  situations failure of	the wave amplitude, or  in  the  case  of  yaw,  never the 
lashing  can occur and containers  may be lost over-	greater than the wave slope. Thus, these motions are 
board.  Underdeck  cargo  in  ordinary  cargo ships and	rarely a significant problem of themselves. Further, 
bulk  commodities in colliers, ore ships and grain ships	these motions are caused by exciting forces that  are 
can  shift  if the  motions become too severe. Excessive	comparable to the ship's weight or, in the case of yaw, 
motions  of  warships  can  both  seriously degrade  the	the product of the weight times the ship length. It is 
combat  readiness  of its  crew  and adversely affect the	unreasonable to expect that any small addition will be 
performance  of its weapons systems.  Finally, offshore	able to produce an effect comparable in magnitude. 
platforms, pipe-laying ships and drill ships require only	Only the usual directional control,  or  steering,  is  
very  small motions to perform  many  of the individual	needed, as discussed in Chapter IX.
operat!ons.  The amplitud~ of the  motions may  be th~			Motions that have vertical components (heave, pitch 
most   Important   feature   ill  these   latter ocean  engl-		and roll) have restoration forces. For these motions 
neering  tasks,  whereas  in some of the other situations		the ship behaves somewhat like a damped spring-mas~ 
mentioned,  t~e  ~elocity or acceleration of the motions		system. These motions exhibit resonance and respond 
may  be of prmcipal ~once~n..		with amplitudes sometimes greater than the wave 
T~e.purpo~e of .thiSsectIOnIS to  concentrate on the	slope or, in the case of heave, greater than the wave 
add'ttwn8,  eIther  mternal  or external  to the hull, that		amplitude. The magnification factor or nondimensional
reduce or otherwise improve the  motion responses  of  RAO, the  ratio  of the  amplitude  of motion in regular 
the hull. It is assumed that the additions are such that waves to the wave amplitude (or amplitude ofthe wave  
their benefit to the  motions of the  ship outweighs  any  slope)  at  the  resonant  frequency  varies  greatly  
impact on the ability of the ship to perform its assigned amongst the three  motions. The  ma~ification  factor 
task. It is particularly challenging to obtain large im- for heave for a typical ship is less than 1.3 and is 
provements in the motion characteristics of existing frequently less than 1.0. That for pitch is rarely more
than 1.5, but that for roll can be 10 or  more for the 
bare  hull, and 7 or more for  a ship equipped with bilge
12  by  William C. Webster.	keels.


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	127



  The foregoing serves to illustrate that resonant roll 
motions in waves are perhaps the most attractive can- 
didate for control. These motions are large  enough to 
be important in most applications. The almost  total 
lack of inherent roll damping means that small addi- 
tions to this damping can produce large reductions in 
the response. The possibility of controlling pitch mo- 
tions is entertained from time to time, but the pros- 
pects are certainly not as good as they are for roll. It 
appears neither feasible nor necessary to attempt to 
control heave for normal ship forms. The subsequent 
parts of this section explore methods that have been 
investigated and used to control motions, with the pre- 
dominant emphasis on roll motions.
  6.2	Control of Roll. Since, as  described  in Section 
3.8, the most severe roll motion occurs at resonance 
(sometimes referred to as synchronous rolling) the best 
way of reducing it is to increase damping. The most 
common means of doing so is the installation of bilge 
keels. If more control of the roll motions is required, 
the use of special anti-rolling devices may be  called 
for. A multitude of different devices for this purpose 
have been invented but only a few types are in common 
usage. In the following discussion these devices are 
described in general, but special emphasis is placed on 
the popular devices. The stabilizers can be grouped by 
general categories, depending on how they achieve the 
stabilization; Le.,passive, controlled-passive or active.
  (a)	Passive Stabilizers. These devices do not re- 
quire power or a control system to operate. They be- 
long to two separate sub-categories: those that do not 
have moving parts and those that do.
  The primary devices with no moving parts are bilge 
keels (which have been discussed in Section 3.8) and 
sails. Sails are a very effective roll stabilizer for small 
ships and have been used extensively in fishing boats. 
The lift on the stabilizing sail changes as the ship rolls 
and the phasing of these lift forces is such that roll 
energy is removed from the ship. The size of sail re- 
quired and complexity associated with rigging the sail 
are modest for a small boat, but generally prohibitive 
for large ships.
  There are a variety of  devices that  rely  on motion 
of the stabilizer to interact with and to reduce the roll 
motions. These stabilizers are passive in the sense that 
they are unattended and do not rely on special sensors 
or actuators. Typical stabilizers of this type include 
passive antiroll tanks and moving-weight stabilizers. 
Three types of antiroll tanks have been used and 
sketches of them are shown in Fig. 93, adapted from 
Bhattacharyya (1978).
  The free surface tank shown at the top (a) of this 
figure is a single, partially-filled tank which typically 
extends across the full beam of the ship. Its shape and 
internal baffles allow the liquid in the tank to slosh 
from side-to-side in response to the roll motions. The 
phasing of the roll moments acting on the ship as the 
result of the fluid motion in a well-designed tank are



 

such that they reduce the roll motion. This  type  of 
tank was first investigated by Froude, but did not 
receive much attention until the 1950's when it was 
rediscovered and used in several naval vessels.
  A related concept is that of the V-tube antiroll  tank, 
a perspective view of which is shown in the middle (b) 
of Fig. 93. The use of these tanks was pioneered in 
Germany by Frahm around the turn  of  the  century 
and they are often referred to as Frahm tanks. This 
stabilizer consists of two wing tanks connected on the 
bottom by a substantial crossover  duct. These  tanks 
are also partly filled, and the air spaces above the fluid 
in each wing are connected by a duct. As in the free 
surface tanks, when the ship begins to roll, fluid flows 
from wing tank to wing tank causing a time-varying 
roll moment on the ship. With careful design this roll 
moment is of the correct phasing to reduce the roll 
motions (see Fig. 94). As shown in this  figure,  both 
the roll motion and the motion of the fluid in the tank 
are at a larger amplitude than the wave slope.
  Another stabilizer concept introduced by Frahm was 
the external stabilizer tanks, also shown in Fig. 93. 
These tanks were used in several ships (including 
some naval ships) in the early 1900s. In this 
configuration,


128	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 94     Motion  of  the fluid  in  an  antiroll tank



























(a}MOVING WEIGHT TYPE























A,,•


been used in oil 
drilling rig 
applications where 
forward speed is not a 
concern. A 
comparison of 
different tanks is given 
by Vugts (1969).
  A fourth concept is 
that of a moving 
weight stabi­ lizer 
(see Fig. 95a). In this 
scheme a large 
weight is allowed to 
move athwartships on 
a track. It is kept near 
the center of the 
travel by either a 
spring (as shown) or a 
curved track, and it is 
also restrained by a 
damping mechanism. 
These mechanisms 
produce a force, F, 
acting on the moving 
weight that is given 
by
            F=
ks+ds	(232)
where k is the spring 
constant, s is the 
distance of the 
moving weight from 
the ship centerline, d 
is the damp­ ing 
constant ands is the 
moving weight's 
velocity. The motion 
of the ship leads to 
other forces on the 
moving weight which 
cause it to respond in 
such a way as to 
create roll moments 
that counteract the 
wave exciting 
moments. Its action is 
therefore similar to 
that of the fluid in the 
antiroll tanks.
  All four of these 
concepts rely on a 
common, un­ 
derlying physics as a 
basis for operation. 
Each has a mass that 
can transfer from one 
side of the ship to the 
other, and each has a 
design feature that 
restores this mass to 
amidships when the 
ship is near upright. 
The result is that each 
of these passive 
stabilizers  is a 
damped mass-spring 
system that moves in 
response to all three 
transverse motions. In 
a properly designed 
stabilizer, the roll 
moments generated 
by the stabilizer 
movement will 
counteract part of the 
roll moment ap­


Fig. 95 Definitions of variables used in the analysis of stabilizers


the two wing tanks are not connected to one another 
except perhaps by an air duct at the top. Water flows 
in and out of each tank through openings in the hull 
to the sea. This configuration eliminates the duct filled 
with water, which exists in either the free-surface tank 
or the U-tube tank, but has its own set of disadvan­ 
tages. These include corrosion due to the seawater in 
the tank, and resistance to forward motion due both 
to the holes in the hull and the force required to ac­ 
celerate the seawater outside the ship (which is initially


plied to the ship by the seaway, and will reduce 
the overall roll motion. None of these stabilizers can 
elim­ inate roll motions entirely, since the stabilizer 
does not move until the ship moves. In concept all 
of these devices are similar to the classic vibration 
absorber.
  The equations of motion for the ship and stabilizer 
system for all four devices are of exactly the  same 
form and the design parameters used for each are 
similar. The equations of motion are too complex to 
derive here, but details can be found in Vasta, et al 
(1961) or in Webster (1967). A careful analysis of 
the resulting coupled roll, sway, yaw and stabilizer 
system shows that the stabilization performance 
depends prin­


almost at rest) to the speed of the ship as it enters the	cipally on five parameters:	_	_


tank. The horsepower required by this latter drag com­ 
ponent (sometimes called momentum drag) increases 
with the square of the ship speed and can be substan­ 
tial. More recently, a variation of external tanks have
  

1.	Stabilizer size, µ = 6GMTI GMTO, the loss 
of metacentric height caused by the stabilizer divided 
by the metacentric height with the stabilizer weight 
or liquid frozen in mid-position. Each of these 
passive


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	129



stabilizers has the characteristic that, when the ship 
has a heel, the weight in the stabilizer moves to cause 
a moment that increases the heel. In the tank config­ 
urations this loss of stability is simply the free surface 
loss. In moving weight stabilizer, 6GMr is given by
w2 I gkll., where w is the moving weight (mass = wl
g), k is the spring constant restoring the weight to  
the center of its track and gll. is the displacement 
weight, W. The parameter µ measures the static effect 
of a motion of the stabilizer on the roll motion. All 
three tanks shown in Fig. 93 have the sameµ, even 
though their other characteristics may be different.
2.	Stabilizer coupling, er t = wef Wn4, the ratio of
the natural frequency of the stabilizer to the roll nat­ 
ural frequency (also known as stabilizer tuning fac­ 
tor, in order to avoid confusion with the ship tuning 
factor, used elsewhere, which is the ratio of encounter 
frequency to ship roll natural frequency). When the 
ratio, er t, is near unity, the worst motions of the ship 
(those near the resonant frequency) couple easily into 
motions of the stabilizer. In practice, it  is typical for 
this ratio to be slightly larger than unity to account



  4.	Stabilizer capacity, 'TJ., the maximum angle to which 
the stabilizer can heel the ship with all of the weight in the 
stabilizer  on  one side. For  instance,  for a U-tube tank, 'T/. 
is computed as the static heel angle induced when the fluid 
inside has moved to one side and completely fills one wing 
tank. Typical values of capacity are 0.03 to 0.10 rad., 
corresponding to a ca­ pability of  the stabilizer  to cause  a  
static roll of  2 to 6 deg. A stabilizer loses effectiveness if the 
effective wave slope is greater than 'TJ., and in very heavy 
seas the stabilizer might be only marginally effective.
  5.	Stabilizer height parameter,   This parameter is 
given either as
t =	hw/
':,t	g
for the moving weight stabilizer, where h is the height of 
the center of gravity of the moving weight above the roll 
center, or as = S" IS' for the U-tube tank, where
fL   	


for the difference in damping between the ship and the 
stabilizer. The natural frequency of a U-tube tank sys­


S"  =	q )	dv,


tem can be estimated by w 1 = .J2g IS', where
0



L

S'=fA1;)dv
0
and where the girth parameter v, the U-tube free sur­


S' is as before, and where Rand q(v) are defined in Fig. 
95b. Here q(v) is defined to be negative if the tangent 
line to the fl.ow path at the point v is below the roll 
center axis and to be positive if it is above. The height 
parameter for the other tank configurations


face area A 0 and cross-section area A(v) are defined


can be determined by analogy to the U-tube configu­
ration.


in Fig. 95a. The natural frequency of the other types 
of stabilizer tanks can be estimated on the basis of an 
equivalent U-tube (Vasta, et al 1961). The natural fre-

quency of the moving weight is simply -       


The roll moments that arise due to the acceleration
12  -.------,------.------,	i


  3. Nondimensional stabilizer damping, {t, the  ra­ 
tio of the stabilizer's equivalent linear damping to its 
critical damping. This parameter is comparable to /3* 
in the ship roll equation; see Section 3.8, Equation 
(172). Stabilizers are typically moderately damped and 
the damping  is usually quite nonlinear.  Values  of  {t  
of 0.2-0.4 are typical for moderate motions. Therefore, 
these stabilizers do not exhibit a resonance as  marked 
as the ship in roll. The damping in a tank depends on 
the details of the shape of the wing tanks and espe­ 
cially of the crossover duct or, in the case of external 
tanks, on the details of the hull openings. Since  the 
fluid drag associated with fl.ow in this type of compli­ 
cated geometry is difficult to predict, it is common to 
construct a reasonably  large scale  model  of  the tank 
to confirm the damping. Analysis of free surface tanks 
is somewhat more difficult since both the natural fre­





















0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
      TUNING FACTOR.OR NONDIMENSIONAL FREQUENCY, /Ji8
























2.0


quency and the damping of the tank are  sensitive  to 
the water depth.


Fig. 96


Comparison of the computed roll response of o typical ship with and without a 
good passive roll tank


130	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

4       ..,.....-----,------.----,--------,





















0    ;--  ----.---------  ---1


0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
      TUNING FACTOR.OR	• 
NONDIMENSIONAL FREQUENCY, roe


2.0


0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
      TUNING FACTOR.OR	• 
NONDIMENSIONAL  FREQUENCY, CJJe


2.0



Fig. 97 Effect of variations of stabilizer tuning on roll stabilization



Fig. 98 Effect of variations of stabilizer size on roll stabilization

0 -1--  --+--......---+----1---... 	i


0.0	0.5	1.0	1.5
      TUNING FACTOR.OR	• 
NONDIMENSIONAL FREQUENCY, ro8


2.0


0.0	5	1	1
       TUNING FACTOR, OR	• 
NONDIMENSIONAL FREQUENCY, ro8


2.0


Fig. 100 Effect of variations of stabilizer height on roll stabilization
Fig. 99 Effect of variations of stabilizer damping on roll stabilization
against non-dimensional frequency, /;,. = w,/ wn (or


of the mass of the stabilizer weight or fluid from one 
side of the ship to the other counteract the static mo­ 
ment of the weight or fluid if the stabilizer is mounted 
far below the roll center ( t < 0), and add if the sta­ 
bilizer is mounted far above the roll center ( t > 0).


tuning factor). The following parameters represent a 
typical good design of a stabilizer:
µ   = 
0.20
'Ot't    
= 
1.08


That is, the higher the stabilizer is located in the ship, 
the more effective it is. Because of  the factor  w/ in 
the parameter, stabilizers for ships with high meta­ 
centric stability (high roll resonant frequencies) re­


= 0.30
11. = 0.05
t	= 0.00


(233)


quire stabilizers to be mounted high in the ship if they 
are to be effective.
  The roll magnification factor or RAO (amplitude of 
roll divided by effective maximum wave slope) is a 
simple and effective measure to explore the effect of 
the various stabilizer parameters, when plotted
  

We first consider motions that are small 
enough so that the capacity of the tank, 11., is  
not  a  question. Fig. 96 shows a sample 
calculated magnification factor or RAO for a 
ship in beam seas with a roll damping ratio of 
0.05 (typical for a large ship fitted with bilge 
keels) with and without a stabilizer defined by 
the


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	131




30




C>
ew.
w
0	20
::)

a.

..J

a:
I- 10
z
Se2n

0























0	4	8	12	16
S
I
G
N
I
F
I
C
A
N
T
 
W
A
V
E
 
H
E
I
G
H
T
 
(
m
)



Fi
g. 
98 
sh
o
w
s 
th
e 
ef
fe
ct 
of 
ch
an
ge
s 
in 
st
ab
ili
ze
r 
si
ze
,
µ,. 
Inc
rea
ses 
in 
µ, 
furt
her 
red
uce 
the 
pea
k 
of 
the 
RA
O 
at 
res
ona
nce
, 
but 
als
o 
inc
rea
se 
the 
res
po
nse 
in 
the 
lo
w 
and 
hig
h-
fre
que
ncy 
reg
ion
s 
wh
ere 
the 
sta
bili
zed 
shi
p 
roll
s 
mo
re 
tha
n 
the 
uns
tab
iliz
ed 
shi
p. 
Th
e 
sel
ecti
on 
of 
a µ, 
= 
0.2 
rep
res
ent
s a 
typ
ical 
co
mp
ro
mis
e 
bet
we
en 
the
se 
co
mp
eti
ng 
eff
ect
s.
  F
ig. 
99 
sho
ws 
the 
eff
ect 
of 
cha
nge
s in 
the 
sta
bili
zer 
da
mp
ing
, , 1•     
Wh
en 
the 
da
mp
ing 
is 
mu
ch 
sm
alle
r 
tha
n 
the 
bas
eli
ne 
da
mp
ing 
giv
en 
in 
Eq
uat
ion 
(23
2) 
the 
mo
­ 
tio
ns 
at 
the 
ori
gin
al 
roll 
res
ona
nce 
bec
om
es 
sm
all, 
but 
tw
o 
lar
ge 
res
ona
nce
s at 
fre
que
nci
es 
abo
ve 
and 
bel
ow 
the 
ori
gin
al 
res
ona
nce 
app
ear
. If 
the 
da
mp
ing 
is 
too 
hig
h 
the 
roll 
mo
tio
ns 
are 
littl
e 
diff
ere
nt 
fro
m 
the
ir 
uns
tab
iliz
ed 
cou
nte
rpa
rts.
  F
ig. 
100 
sho
ws 
the 
eff
ect  
of  
sta
bili
zer  
hei
ght
,  1• 
It 
is 
cle
ar 
that 
sta
bili
zer  
per
for
ma
nce  
im
pro
ves  
wit
h  
in­
cre
ase 
in 
hei
ght 
ab
ov
e 
the 
roll 
cen
ter. 
Ho
we
ver
, 
the 
top
sid
e 
spa
ce 
on 
bo
ard 
a 
shi
p is 
usu
all
y 
mo
re 
val
ua
ble


Fig. 101 Effect of stabilizer capacity on roll stabilization in short-crested
random seas


parameters given in Equations (233). At very low fre­ 
quencies both the stabilized and unstabilized  ships 
have an RAO of unity. In other words, in very long 
waves the ship rolls with an amplitude equal to the 
effective wave slope and at these frequencies the sta­ 
bilizer has no motion relative to the ship. The ship 
alone has a sharp peak at its resonant frequency, and 
this peak is greatly reduced by the stabilizer. However, 
for non-dimensional frequencies (tuning factors) below 
about 0.7 and above 1.25, the RAO's are larger for the 
ship with the stabilizer. That is, the stabilizer does not 
improve motions at all frequencies.
  It is rare that a ship experiences a seaway that is 
composed of regular waves of a single frequency. Typ­ 
ical situations involve random seas with component 
waves of many different frequencies and the effect of 
the stabilizer over all these frequencies is important. 
The extremely large roll reductions observed near roll 
resonance are not realized in a real seaway. In partic­ 
ular, the average roll reduction in a real seaway is 
typically of the order of 50 percent for a well-designed 
stabilizer, even though the reduction at resonance is 
90 percent or more.
  It is interesting to examine typical variations in the 
calculated beam-seas motions with changes in stabi­ 
lizer size, tuning, damping, and stabilizer height pa­ 
rameters. Fig. 97 shows the effect on stabilization of 
changes in the stabilizer tuning, CT 1 • One sees that 
changes in tank tuning factor, CT 11 either above  or 
below the baseline frequency given in Equation (232) 
lead to significant changes in the shape of the response 
curve. A stabilizer with a natural frequency much 
higher  than  the  ship's  roll  resonance  frequency,   CT 1
>> 1, is effective only at high frequencies. A similar
statement also applied to a tank with a much lower 
natural frequency.


for other purposes and stabilizers are  often  placed 
deep in the ship. This figure shows that if the 
stabilizer is placed too deep in the ship its 
performance may be marginal.
  When roll motions become larger, the nonlinear roll 
characteristics and nonlinear tank damping  play  a 
more important role. As a result, the stabilization per­ 
formance in these situations can vary  considerably 
from one ship to another. The most important single 
parameter governing these differences is the tank ca­ 
pacity, 71•. Fig. 101 shows the variation of the signif­ 
icant roll motions as a function of significant wave 
height for a typical unstabilized ship, and for the same 
ship with stabilizers that differ only in their  capacity, 
71•. The motions are in a short-crested irregular 
seaway at the worst heading. It is seen that in low and 
mod­ erate seas the stabilizers are quite effective and 
do not differ in performance. As the sea state increases 
the stabilizer with the lowest capacity saturates  first  
and its stabilization is not as good as for the higher-ca­ 
pacity tank. The effects of tank saturation appear at 
small roll angles when 71. is small and not until larger 
roll angles when 71. is large. Thus, the capacity 
param­ eter must be considered in relation to the 
mission pro­ file of the ship in which it will be 
installed.
  Selection of the appropriate passive stabilizer for 
a given application requires consideration of several 
dif­ ferent factors. Within a rough approximation 
all four types of passive stabilizers discussed, i.e., 
moving weight, U-tube, free surface and external 
tanks, are not grossly different in weight for a given 
set of design parameters. The moving weight can be 
much smaller in volume, since the weight can be 
constructed using steel and even denser materials. 
However, the size of the weight increases in direct 
proportion to the ship displacement and safety 
considerations restrict mov­ ing weight stabilizers 
to small ships. U-tube tanks re­ quire somewhat 
more internal structure for the bulkheads and ducts 
than do free surface tanks but


132	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 


have the advantage that they do not restrict fore-and- 
aft passage. That is, the space above and below the 
water cross-over duct is available for other purposes. 
Free surface tanks have the advantage that it is pos- 
sible to vary the  tank  natural  frequency  by  changes 
in water level and thus accommodate changes in the 
ship's metacentric height. It is, however, difficult to 
measure the water level at sea and  it is not  easy  for 
the crew to decide the best water level setting for a 
given situation. External tanks do not restrict fore- and-
aft passage inside the ship but have unique cor- rosion 
problems and high added resistance.
  Several features of all four passive stabilizers re- 
quire special emphasis:
  •	These stabilizers cannot eliminate all of the roll 
motions. Each relies on the ship motions to generate 
the sloshing in the tanks or the motion of the weight. 
The principal effect is a significant decrease in the level 
of roll motions in the neighborhood of roll resonance.
  •	All passive stabilizers of this type increase the roll 
motions at frequencies significantly away from the roll 
resonance. For instance, in seas that are predominantly 
from the stern, the encounter frequency may be quite 
low and the ship may actually roll more with the sta- 
bilizer in operation.
  •	Passive stabilizers do not require the ship to have 
forward way. In fact, passive stabilizers are  perhaps 
the most effective system of roll reduction at zero 
speed. This is often a critical consideration for drill 
ships and other ocean engineering vehicles.
  •	The action of the stabilizer is to eliminate the  
sharp peak in the roll RAG at resonance. The stabilized 
RAG curve is more or less flat over a large frequency 
band. The roll motions of the stabilized ship therefore 
have a random or unpredictable characteristic similar  
to that of the seaway. This is in sharp contrast to the 
unstabilized ship motions which tend to have regular 
and predictable, although larger, roll motions. The 
result is that the stabilized ship may be perceived sub- 
jectively by the on-board personnel as less comforta- 
ble.
  •	The motion of the passive stabilizer's fluid or 
weight in high sea states may become so severe that


saturation occurs. The fluid can hit the tank top or 
the weight can come to the end of its track. In either 
case the stabilizer loses effectiveness and the ship 
roll be- havior becomes more like the unstabilized 
ship. Pru- dence dictates, therefore, that other means 
of stabilization, particularly bilge keels, also be 
installed .
  •	In anti-roll tanks it is common to use fresh 
water with additives to prevent corrosion. It is 
possible  to use other liquids including fuel oils and 
ordinary sea water. These latter liquids may require 
special atten- tion to combat corrosion and 
flammability dangers.
  (b)	Controlled-passive  stabilizers.  In  the  event 
that the roll stabilization offered by ordinary passive 
stabilizers (such as described in the previous sub-
sec- tion) is not sufficient, it may be possible to use a 
slightly more complex stabilization system known as 
a con- trolled-passive roll stabilizer. The concept is 
to improve the performance of a passive system by 
adding a so- phisticated control system which, 
although it does not change the basic action of the 
stabilizer, modifies this action to make it more 
effective.
  A typical stabilizer of this variety is the so-called 
controlled-passive	roll tank discussed in Bell & 
Walker (1966) and sketched in Fig. 102. This tank is 
similar in shape to the U-tube but the water cross-
over is much larger in cross section and the air cross-
over duct contains a servo-controlled valve system. 
Since these valves control only the flow of air, very 
little power is required for their activation. When the  
valve is closed, the passage of air from  one  wing  
tank  to the other is prevented and the motion of the 
water between the wing tanks is restricted by the 
resulting compression of the air in the top of each 
tank. When  the valve is open, the air can pass freely 
and the water can slosh without restriction from 
wing tank to wing tank.





MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	133



  The typical controlled-passive roll tank is designed 
to have a tank tuning factor, u 1, well above unity. Fig. 
103 shows three RAOs: one for a ship stabilized by a 
good passive tank, one for a ship stabilized with a 
controlled-passive tank, and one for a ship with the 
controlled-passive tank but with the valves locked in 
the open position. The first and third of these curves 
are duplicates of curves in Fig. 98. As seen in these 
figures, there is little difference between the controlled­ 
passive tank and the equivalent high-tuning-factor, 
(i.e., high-natural-frequency) passive tank at frequen­ 
cies above the roll resonance. Both tanks produce 
smaller roll motions at these frequencies than either 
the ship alone or the ship with a well designed passive 
tank.
  At frequencies in the neighborhood of the roll res­ 
onance and below the roll resonance, however, the fluid 
in the high-natural-frequency tank with the valves 
locked open can slosh from one side of the ship to the 
other much too fast. The result is the greatly exag­ 
gerated low-frequency roll motions which are more 
severe than either the ship alone, or the ship with a 
well designed passive tank. The control system pre­ 
vents this unsatisfactory behavior at low frequencies 
by closing the valves and slowing the flow whenever 
it would otherwise lead to large roll motions. The con­ 
trol system thus regulates the phasing of the fluid 
motion primarily in the low-frequency regime. A well 
designed controlled-passive tank has superior roll sta­ 
bilization (as much as a 20-40 percent better) over all 
frequencies compared to those of a well designed pas­ 
sive tank of the same size, µ.
Controlled-passive tanks have several disadvan­
tages, and these have generally prevented their wide­ 
spread use. First, in order to achieve the high-natural­ 
frequency tank that a simple control system can slow 
down, a large crossover duct is required. Therefore, a 
controlled passive tank has a larger weight of  fluid for 
a tank of the same size, µ. Second, a controlled-passive 
tank depends on the operation of both the control sys­ 
tem (which normally includes gyros and sophisticated 
electronics) and the mechanical activation system for 
the valves. If any of this mechanical equipment fails, 
the tank is either ineffective (the valves locked closed) 
or inferior (the valves locked open). Nonetheless, sev­ 
eral of these stabilizers have been installed and they 
appear to have a good operating record.
  (d) Active stabilization. The border between con­ 
trolled-passive and active stabilization is not distinct. 
Active stabilization generally implies that the system 
requires the use of machinery of significant power and, 
in order to justify the expense of this equipment, the 
system is designed to be much more effective in elim­ 
inating roll motions than passive systems. Each system 
consists of two essential parts: a control system to 
detect motions of the ship and to predict the roll mo­ 
ment that will be applied to the ship by the seaway in 
the immediate future and a moment generating system



that will apply a roll moment to cancel the predicted 
moment.
  The possible moment-generating systems include: 
fin stabilization, gyro stabilization and active-tank 
sta­ bilization. Whereas the control system for each 
type of stabilization system is similar, the means by 
which the counteracting roll moment is produced is 
entirely different. The control system will be 
discussed first, followed by a more detailed 
discussion of each of these different physical 
systems.
  1.	Control system. It is the job of the control sys­ 
tem to command the moment-generating system to 
act in such a way that the roll motions are reduced. 
It is possible to develop such a control system that 
ignores the cause of the roll and produces the desired 
command signal on the basis of measured roll 
motions and em­ pirically determined constants 
(known as gains). How­ ever, an insight into the 
capabilities and limitations of an active system can 
be gained by use of the equations of motion.
  For perfect stabilization, the roll moment that the 
seaway will apply to the ship must be known in ad­ 
vance of its actual application, since all of the means 
of producing counteracting roll moments on the ship 
have a lag between the time when the commanded 
moment is received and the time when the roll 
moment is actually produced. Without constantly  
measuring the seaway in the neighborhood of the ship, 
it is clear that the current motions of the ship alone, 
even if measured perfectly, would at best yield the 
instanta­ neous roll moment acting on the ship. 
However, if the stabilizer has a relatively small lag in  
its response, then an estimate of the current seaway-
induced roll moment is sufficient to produce very 
good stabilization. In principle, Equation (171) in 
Section 3 can be used for this purpose. Its use, 
however, is complicated by
the fact that it is a statement in the frequenc:y domain 
(as a consequence of the coefficients A44  and B44  being 
frequency dependent). Using a mathematical proce­ 
dure known as convolution, this equation can be trans­
formed so that the required roll moment can be 
expressed as the sum of a constant times the instan­ 
taneous roll acceleration plus an integral over all pre­ 
vious time of the roll acceleration history. In practice, 
one is principally interested in the roll moments 
applied to the ship at frequencies in the neighborhood 
of the roll resonance. In this case, one can 
approximate Equa­ tion (171) by a differential 
equation,
( 144 + A.44) i)4  + B 4 1J4 + C  1J4 = l'4(t}	(234)
where  the  constants  .A.44 and  B44   are  chosen  to  be
.A 4 ((1)n4} and _b44((1)n4), the values of these parameters
at roll resonance. If, in a specific sea condition, the 
roll angle, the roll rate and the roll acceleration can be 
accurately measured, then Equation (234) gives an es- 
timate of the instantaneous roll moment, f'4(   t ), in 
that sea state. Accurate full-scale measurements of 
roll velocity are not easy and measurements of roll 
accel-


134	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



•M
 
L

Fig. 104    Active fin  stabilization  diagram




eration are difficult Instruments that perform these 
tasks are susceptible to errors from many sources, 
including noise originating from ship vibrations and 
electrical noise. These errors are reflected in P,(t).
  The control system most frequently adopted makes 
use of yet another simplifying assumption. It is usually 
assumed that the commanded roll moment is given as
P,(t) ::::: C1    iJ, + C2 1J,	(235)


needed to reduce motions, since their drag is 
signifi­ cant. Many manufacturers have designed and 
installed stabilizers. Each is different in the 
controls, shape of the fin, the exact mechanical 
details of operation, etc. Fin stabilizers have been 
used extensively for high­ speed vessels, 
particularly on warships, cruise ships and luxury 
liners.
  When the fins are placed at an angle of attack, the 
flow over them resulting from the forward speed of


Where C1 and C2  are comparable  in size to fJ '  and  
6 , and are chosen to best stabilize  the  roll  angle 
with the given stabilizer hardware.
  It should be clear that the use of Equation (235) 
represents a compromise between what is required and 
what is measurable. However, with responsive roll sta­ 
bilization systems such as fin stabilizers, the approx­ 
imation is less severe than one would  first  surmise. 
For waves with encounter frequencies near resonance, 
the first and third terms in Equation (234), nearly can­ 
cel out (the cancellation is exact at  resonance).  Thus, 
at this critical frequency, the seaway-applied roll mo­ 
ment is in phase with the roll rate, and roll acceleration 
is not required. In classical control theory this type of 
input to the moment generation system (Equation 235) 
is called position and rate feedback.
2.	Stabilizing fins. By far the most popular (and
most effective) means of active stabilization of ship roll 
is through the use of fins. Fins are mounted  on  the 
side of a hull, usually near the turn of the bilge. During 
operation the fins usually extend beyond the beam of 
the ship and sometimes below the baseline of the ship. 
See Fig. 104. As a result, some additional mechanism 
must be provided for their retraction while maneuver­ 
ing in port and for docking. During transit of the ship, 
the fins also are usually retracted unless they are





 


(B) CLOSE-UP VIEW OF PORT FIN

Fig. 105 location and orientation of active antiroll fins


MOTIONS IN WAVES	135

fin using strain gauges on the fin-hull attachment. 
When the achieved force from either fin is less  than 
the commanded force the angle of the fins is increased 
and vice versa.
  The limitations in predicting the roll moment that 
will act on the ship and the time lag in controlling the 
fins prevent perfect stabilization. Further, in ex- 
tremely high seas, the commanded force on a fin may 
be larger than the fin is able to produce and a deg- 
radation in the stabilizer effectiveness occurs. How- 
ever, a well designed fin stabilizer system will provide 
better stabilization than other known stabilizers. Fig. 
106 (Chadwick, 1955) shows the stabilization achieved 
with a Denny-Brown fin stabilizer.
  3.	Rudder stabilization. Baitis, et al (1983) and 
Kallstrom, et al (1988)discuss an interesting variation 
of fin stabilization which is possible to use in special 
cases. In some ships, the service speed is high enough 
and the center of effort of the rudder is far enough 
below the roll center that placing the rudder at  an 
angle of attack will produce a substantial roll moment. 
The effect of this moment is frequently  observed  as 
an initial heel into a turn in the first instants after 
initiating a hard turn at full speed.
  If the responsiveness of the steering machinery is 
such that the rudder  can be quickly moved from  side 
to side, it may be possible to use the  rudder  forces 
(and the corresponding roll moments) for roll stabili- 
zation. In such a system the commanded rudder angle 
for roll stabilization would be simply added to that 
required for course keeping. The frequencies at which 
the stabilizing roll moments are required are suffi- 
ciently high compared to those to which the ship re- 
sponds in turning, that such a system would not 
adversely affect the course keeping.
  Naval ships are good candidates for this type of 
stabilization since they are of high speed and  have 
large rudders mounted low on the ship  (sometimes 
even below the baseline). The rudders of typical com- 
mercial ships may not be sufficient to generate ade- 
quate roll moments for this type of stabilization. In 
almost all cases the moment arm for a rudder is much 
less than that for a fin mounted at the bilge and thus, 
for an equivalent stabilization,  the  instantaneous 
forces developed on the rudder must be much larger. 
Although rudders are much bigger than typical  fins, 
the induced drag associated with the larger forces may 
or may not be larger than that for the fins.
  4.	Gyro stabilization.  Gyros have been  used  for 
roll stabilization for over 80 years, principally in pas- 
senger ships and later in submarines. The idea is sim- 
ply that  a  gyro  spinning  about  a vertical  axis exerts 
a substantial roll moment on its foundation propor- 
tional to its precession  rate  about  a transverse  axis. 
In the active systems the precession rate is forced in 
order to develop the commanded roll moment. It is 
possible to have a passive gyro design (sometimes 
called a Schlick type after its original designer), but


136	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


these  have  not  been  used  in many years. Several de-	the types of pumps required do not have extremely 
signs   of  active  gyro  stabilizers   have  been put  into	high efficiency.
practice,  notably the designs  by Sperry. Unlike fin sta-		6.3 Control of Pitch. The possibilities of anti-pitch- 
bilization, gyro stabilization does not increase the drag	ing devices must  be  considered,  although  the  wave 
of  the  ship.  However,  in  order  to  generate roll mo-	forces and moments on a ship are much greater than 
ments  of a size comparable to the roll moments applied	those that cause rolling. One device of  demonstrated 
by  the  seaway,   the  gyros  must  be  physically quite	effectiveness is a pair of fixed fins near the bow (Ab- 
large  and will consume considerable power. Generally	kowitz, 1959). During synchronous pitching, the bow 
the  cost,  weight  and  space  requirements   have  miti-	motion is nearly out-of-phase with that of the oncoming 
gated  against  their recent application.	waves, and the relative vertical velocity between ship
  5.	Active  tank  stabilizers.	It  is  possible to  con-	and wave is greatest at this location. Fixed fins de- 
ceive of an  active stabilizer  using  a tank  of fluid, and	velop, therefore, large forces and pitch moments as a 
one such system  was actually constructed by Minorsky	result. Use of these devices has been very limited as 
(Chadwick & Klotter, 1954).This concept uses an axial	a result of the vibration associated with the separated 
flow pump to force the water  in the tank  from one side	flow  around  the  foils  and  the  increased  resistance 
of the  ship  to  the  other,  rather  than  to  have it slosh	which accompanies the development of the large fin 
under  the  natural  roll,  sway  and yaw  forces, as hap-	forces. Some solutions to the former problem  have 
pens  in  a  passive  tank.  Webster   (1967) studied  the	been proposed  (Cummins,  1959)(Ochi, 1961). 
problem of the  design of such a system  in some detail.		Bow bulbs of the type used by Taylor appear to have
  For a number of reasons this concept is not as at- comparatively  little  damping  effect,  since  they  are 
tractive as the other active systems. First, the  pump  streamlined  and normally well below the surface.  The 
when activated  in such a system  accelerates  the  fluid  very large  bulbs that  have become common in the last 
in the tank either to the port or starboard side of the  twenty years  have been reported  to provide some pitch 
ship. A sizable amount of fluid arrives at that side only damping. However, they also increase both the pitch  
some time after pumping begins. That is, a  consider-  moment of inertia  and added mass  moment of inertia. 
able lag exists between the time that  the water  is set  These  tend  to  lengthen  the  natural  pitching  period,  
into motion and when the desired roll moment is which is generally undesirable.
achieved. As  discussed  above, it is not really possible		Fixed fins at the stern have  been  long used  to  im- 
to anticipate the required  roll moment, and the addition	prove the flow and hence reduce  propeller  vibration. 
of this large lag in the tank response limits the effec- Their effectiveness in producing pitch damping is, how- 
tiveness   of  the   roll  stabilization. Therefore., funda-	ever, small since the relative velocity between ship and 
mental  reasons   exist  that   prevent   active roll tanks	wave is small at this location. The possibility of acti- 
from achieving the stabilization level of a good, rapidly	vated stern fins has been suggested as a supplement 
responding  active fin system.	to fixed bow fins. The use of bow and / or stern tanks
  The amount of instantaneous pumping power re- with openings  to  the  sea  that  allow water  to  flow in 
quired to achieve considerably better stabilization than    and out  like an  external  roll tank  has  also been  dis-   
a passive roll tank is substantial  and might be as high  cussed.  To be  effective  for  a  conventional  ship  hull,  
as 10 percent of the installed shaft  power of the  ship.  these  tanks  would have  to  occupy approximately  20 
The average power, on the other hand, is theoretically percent of the ship length. Their use at forward speed 
negative  (out of  the  tank)  since the  stabilizer  acts  as   would incur an enOrmouSmomentum drag penalty. As 
a wave power absorber. It  is unlikely that  such a sys-  a  result,  it  seems  unlikely  that  external  pitch  tanks 
tem would actually yield any net useful power, since would be attractive for most applications.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	137
Section 7
Assessing Ship Seaway Performance13


  7.1 Measures of Performance. The necessity to 
forecast the operational worth of a ship long before it 
is completed and goes to sea poses a multifaceted chal­ 
lenge to the ship designer. One of those facets is the 
ship's response to its environment, particularly its mo­ 
tions in various seaways to be encountered. Not only 
must the naval architect be able to predict the per­ 
formance of a ship in any seaway during its design 
stage, but he or she also needs a methodology to assess 
the overall adequacy of its predicted seaway perform­ 
ance. Such a methodology is described in this section. 
It is intended to be useful in assessing the seaway 
performance of ships engaged in their normal, oper­ 
ational missions, not to be used to assess the surviv­ 
ability of ships in extreme seas, a topic discussed in 
Chapters II, III and IV, Vol. I.
  St. Denis (1976) has suggested an appropriate gen­ 
eral measure for assessing a ship's operational per­ 
formance in a seaway, which he calls environmental 
operability: "Given a mission and a sea-based system 
by which to fulfill it," he said, "the environment of 
weather and sea will tend to degrade the effectiveness 
in which the system will perform the mission. It is this 
environmental degradation that is the central subject 
of inquiry. Since in airs and seas that are calm the 
environmental degradation is nil, the system's calm air 
and calm sea performance of its mis ion can be taken 
as the standard of reference. By so doing, environ­ 
mental operability is defined as and measured by the 
degree of attainment of calm air and still water mission 
performance. It is this ratio that is the index of en­ 
vironmental operability."
  The above will be referred to here as the measure 
or index of seakeeping performance. In general, the 
methodology for assessing seakeeping performance 
depends upon four factors, which need definition and 
quantification:
  (a)	Mission. Missions are assigned to the ship, in­ 
cluding appropriate conditions of loading. The overall 
missions of virtually all the ships of the world may be 
subdivided into three categories:
  1.	Port-to-port transportation of goods or people 
either by ships operating on a fixed schedule (liners) 
or by ships engaged in continuous operation (tramps 
and bulk carriers).
  2.	Military missions carried out entirely at sea, such 
as ocean surveillance, defensive or offensive operations 
of and against forces at sea or against shore targets.
  3.	Commercial missions at sea, such as fishing, oil 
drilling, or ocean mining.


13 Section 7 written by Philip Mandel.
  

Each mission in any of these three overall 
categories may include several different ship 
functions. Typical military ship functions under a 
surveillance mission, for example, are transit, 
helicopter launch and recov­ ery, and at-sea 
replenishment.
  (b)	Environment. Ocean surface roughness and 
wind speeds are defined and quantified as  a  function 
of both location and time in Section 2. For the 
purposes of this section, the common maritime 
practice of quan­
tifying ocean surface roughness by strata called sea 
state numbers is employed. The strata used in this 
section are characterized by the significant wave 
heights (and modal wave periods) shown in Tables 6 
and 7 (Section 2).  While  significant  wave  height, 
H¼, and modal wave period, Tm, are the two param­ 
eters  currently  used   to  characterize   the  sea   state, 
H ¾, is the prime parameter. Tm, while important, is 
secondary because for every possible value of Tm 
there is always a positive limiting value of H¼, 
governing ship speed within the ship's operating 
envelope. The opposite is not always true. For large 
values of H¼, there is very likely to be no value of Tm 
within the bound of possible Tm values observed to 
exist in the ocean (0 < Tm < 24 sec) that will permit 
operation within the desired ship's speed operating 
envelope.
  (c)	Ship responses. Specific responses are 
examined as a function of ocean surface roughness, 
ship speed and ship-wave heading angle, maximum 
attainable speed in both calm and rough water. Ship 
responses, include all of the ship responses, both 
absolute and relative, discussed in Section 7.3. 
Methods of calculat­ ing the responses are treated in 
Sections 3,4 and 5.
(d)	Seakeeping performance criteria. These are a
key element in developing a methodology for 
assessing a ship's seaway operational performance, 
and  with their prescribed limiting values, determine 
whether or not a mission(s) can be carried out. This 
factor is cov­ ered fully in sub-sections 7.3-7.6.
  Before proceeding to discuss quantitative measures 
of the seakeeping performance of ships it is  well to 
note that the single word ship is used throughout this 
section to include all marine vehicles such as the mo­ 
nohull, SWATH, hydrofoil, planing, and surface effect 
ships, as well as air cushion vehicles. The single word 
ship is also used to denote the total ship system, which 
in all cases comprises at the minimum the following 
four elements:
  1.	The hull or platform; its type, geometry, and 
structure.
  2.	The systems needed to operate the hull of 
plat­ form, (here called platform systems) i.e., its 
power plant, steering system, motion control 
systems, etc.
  3.	The systems needed to perform the mission or 
missions assigned to the ship (called mission 
systems).


138	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


  4.	The  people  (in number,  kind and training)  nec-		cargo or people. For this function, SPI-2, the ratio of 
essary  to  operate  the  total ship system.			ideal transit time in smooth water to the actual transit 
Two quantitative   measures  of  ship seakeeping per-		time, is appropriate. SPI-2 is one of the key factors 
formance,   called  Seakeeping   Performance   Indexes				needed to calculate voyage time on a particular route 
(SPI),   have  been  recognized  conceptually for  years.			and in a particular season to  a  specified degree  of 
Both of them  are  in accord with the  St. Denis general			certainty. This is the most essential ingredient in as- 
index.  One measure,  here  called  SPI-1, is  defined as			sessing the operational worth of transportation ships 
mission   effectiveness.  This is the fraction of time that			engaged in regular  or  a scheduled  service. Other key 
a given ship in a given condition of loading can perform			factors involved in calculating  voyage  time  to a spec- 
a  specified military  or  commercial mission (or mix of			ified degree of certainty are not included in SPI-2 be- 
missions),  for  a  predetermined  profile of ship speeds			cause  they  are  not  directly  associated  with  ship 
and  headings  in a  specified ocean area and season.			performance in rough seas. These key factors are as- 
The  second measure,  here  called SPI-2, is a transit	sociated with ocean currents, wind drag, fouling, vis- time  
index.  It  is  uniquely  appropriate   for the  many			ibility conditions, deterioration of power output, cost
ships  of the  world devoted solely to port-to-port trans-		of fuel, harbor conditions, etc. It should be noted that 
portation. It also applies to  fishing boats  traveling  to  just  as  SPI-1  is  not  applicable  to  the  transportation 
and  from  fishing  grounds,  and it  may apply to naval	mission, SPI-2 is not suitable for the ship missions for 
vessels en route to a specific destination when mini-  which  SPI-1 is  useful.  Both  SPI-1 and  SPI-2 may  be 
mum elapsed time of transit  is  of  overriding  impor-  useful  for  frigates  and  destroyers  on  convoy duty. 
tance.  SPI-2  is  defined as  transit   time index,  which			7.2    Involuntary    and	Voluntary	Speed  Reduc- 
is the ideal time that a ship needs for a transit in calm tions. The values  of  both  SPI-1 and  2 are  intimately 
water  between  two  or more specified ports divided by	linked to seaway-induced restrictions on ship speed and 
the  actual  time  that  the  ship  would require to travel	on ship-wave heading direction. In this sub-section pri- 
between  the  same  two  ports  in seas  appropriate to a	mary emphasis is on the restrictions on ship speed in 
specified season or seasons. For a designated mini- head seas, which is the critical ship-wave heading for mum-
distance route SPI-2 is also the ratio of the av- most ships. The restrictions  on ship speed at other ship- erage 
speed of that  ship on that route in the designated	wave headings are discussed in sub-sections 7.5 and 
seas  to the  calm water  speed of that  ship in the same	7.7.
condition of loading and with the same bottom fouling.			It was shown in Section 5 that maximum power- 
This  index  is  called the  expected speed fraction	(St.		limited speed at any heading, in any seaway, occurs 
Denis, 1976).				at the point on the appropriate curve of required power 
The details of how to calculate the Mission Effec- of the ship, plotted as a function of speed, correspond- tiveness  
Index, SPI-1 and the Transit Time Index, SPI-   ing to  the  available  propulsion  power,  Fig. 88. Avail- 2 are 
outlined in Sub-Sections 7.7 and 7.8. Their general		able power in different sea conditions is dependent 
significance  is discussed here.				mainly on the characteristics of the propulsion plant 
SPI-1 is  directly  useful  in assessing the operational	and the propulsor's interaction with the waves and the 
worth of the many military ships, and some commercial hull of the ship. Required power as a function of speed 
ships-such	as cruise ships-whose	primary missions		is dependent on sea state, ship heading, ship size and 
are  conducted  and completed at  sea. Assuming that  a		configuration. The increase in required power due to 
correct   set   of  seakeeping   performance criteria  and		rough water is attributable mainly to added drag in a
their prescribed limiting values are available for each seaway. But the reduction in available power in rough 
particular ship mission and that the probabilities of water results from both the drop in power plant output 
occurrence of wave conditions in the desired  ocean  under  overload  and  the  effect of  ship motions  in re-  
areas and over the desired time periods are  known,  ducing  propulsive  efficiency. The  reductions  in  ship SPI-
1 can be determined. We must calculate the  per-  speed attributable  to both reduced available power and cent of 
time (Le.,probability) that the actual values of increased required power are called involuntary speed various ship 
response never exceed the prescribed val- reductions because they occur whether  the ship captain ues of the 
applicable performance criteria. This percent wants them to occur or not.
of  time,  SPI-1, is  used  directly  in judging the opera-		The attainable speedoflarge, full low-powered ships 
tional  worth  of a  ship. Performance limitations, other	in rough seas is determined primarily by this  invol- 
than   seakeeping,  may  even  more severely  constrain	untary speed reduction. In fact, large low-powered su- 
this percent  of time, but the percent  of time measured	pertankers are usually  slowed  down  sufficiently  by 
by SPI-1 can never  be exceeded unless  the  ship or its	rough seas to avoid problems of severe motions. 
operational  doctrine is altered.		But  for  moderate  to  high-speed ships there  is  also
  Because of its restriction to a predetermined mix of a voluntary speed  reduction  related  to  ship  motions. 
fixed speeds, SPI-1 is not useful in calculating the Fig. 107 (Mandel, 1979) shows for a hypothetical high- 
operational worth of ships engaged in the common, speed monohull ship, in two different conditions of 
commercial function of port-to-port transportation of loading, how attainable speed varies with head seas


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	139




 

of different significant heights. It illustrates both the 
involuntary speed reduction, caused by added required 
power and reduced available power, and the voluntary 
speed reduction caused by slamming (at the lighter 
draft) and by deck wetness (at the deep draft). The 
figure suggests that the involuntary  speed reductions 
are relatively small, although this may not always be 
the case. As the sea state severity increases the am- 
plitudes of motion of this high-speed ship increase, and 
eventually, even with active motion stabilizers, the mo- 
tions of the ship will become so severe that the captain 
fears for the ability of his crew to carry out their 
function, for the comfort of his passengers or for pos- 
sible damage to the ship or its systems and its payload. 
In the case of military ships, the motions may become 
so severe that one or more ship functions cannot be 
performed. Vital operational capabilities, like launch 
and recovery of aircraft, become very hazardous, or 
detection of other ships by means of sonar may become 
impossible. (In all of these cases, the seas are severe 
enough to reduce operational capability, but they are 
not so severe that ship  survivability  is  threatened). 
The only recourse that  the  ship captain  has  is either 
to reduce the speed of his ship, or to change its heading



with respect to the waves, or both. These speed re- 
ductions and heading changes are called voluntary be- 
cause they are brought about by a decision of the 
master and are not imposed by factors like added drag 
or decreased propulsive efficiency over which he has 
no control.
  Fig. 108, taken from Lewis (1959) and Marks and 
Ferdinande (1960), shows quantitative speed reduction 
data similar to the hypothetical data of  Fig.  108 for 
two classes of general cargo ships at five different 
ship- wave heading angles taken from actual voyage 
rec- ords. The two curves labeled" power reduced" 
indicate very roughly the points of transition between 
invol- untary and voluntary speed reduction for these 
two types of cargo ship.
  Fig. 109 shows full-scale log data for the 218-
m(715- ft) 21-knot containership Dart Europe (the  
same ship as in Fig. 88) in head seas, as plotted by 
Sellars and Setterstrom (1987) from data in Aertssen 
and  van Sluijs (1972). The figure shows greater 
involuntary speed reductions for this ship before power 
was vol- untarily reduced than in Figs. 108 and 109 
and cor- respondingly less voluntary speed reduction 
as sea conditions become more severe.
  Because SPI-2 is concerned with maximum attain- 
able ship speed in all seas from calm to rough, it is 
likely that both involuntary and voluntary speed re- 
ductions may be important in calculating SPI-2. On 
the other hand, because SPI-1 is only concerned with 
pre- determined or specified speed values (which are 
almost always below the maximum calm water speed), 
it is



140	PRINCIPLES  OF   NAVAL   ARCHITECTURE

way Responses.  In  general  usage,  the  words  index 
and criterion have similar meanings. But in the lit- 
erature on seakeeping, a clear distinction has  gradu- 
ally taken form. The term seakeeping performance 
index, or index of environmental operability (Section 
7.1), is used here as an overall statistical  measure  of 
the degradation of seaway performance of a total ship 
system over a period of time. In contrast, the term 
seakeeping performance criterion refers to a specific 
aspect of ship response to a seaway (amplitude of 
motion, individual event or frequency of occurrence of 
events),   each of which-if	severe  enough-can	de- 
grade the performance of one or more of the elements 
of a total ship system to an unacceptable level. (See 
sub-section 7.4).
  Twelve examples of currently used seaway perform- 
ance criteria are given in Table 19, together with the 
elements of the total ship system that they may affect 
and the performance degradations they  may  cause. 
The twelve seakeeping performance criteria are sub- 
divided in the table into four  categories  of  response, 
as follows:


most probable that only voluntary speed  reductions 
and heading restrictions will be important  for  SPI-I. 
Of course, if the specified speed values are very close 
to the ship's maximum calm water speed,  then  Fig. 
108 shows that the involuntary speed reduction might 
slightly degrade the range of sea state severities in 
which the ship may carry out its mission. However, in 
most practical cases,  the  values  of speed at  which it 
is desired to calculate the values of SPI-1 are  below 
the speed at which the involuntary speed reductions 
play a large role, and the voluntary  speed reductions 
are more important.
  The process by which a ship captain makes his de- 
cision to voluntarily reduce ship speed or change the 
ship-wave heading direction is necessarily subjective. 
The concepts of seakeeping performance  criteria  and 
of limiting prescribed values for those criteria dis- 
cussed in the following sections were developed to 
quantify this subjective process. The increasing trend 
toward installing motion monitoring  instrumentation 
on modem ships can be of great assistance in devel- 
oping useful and reliable limiting values of the various 
performance criteria, as well as providing useful op- 
erating guidance to the ship master.
  In this section emphasis is on the medium and high- 
speed ship for which voluntary  speed  reductions  are 
of particular importance. It is assumed that available 
power is always adequate, and both mission perform- 
ance (SPI-1) and attainable speed (SPI-2) depend 
mainly on direct and indirect effects of motions. For 
slow-speed vessels where available power affects SPI- 
2, and for all ships where lost time in rough seas must 
be made up in good weather, the problem of required 
maximum installed power (or service power allowance) 
is important. See Sections 5 and 8.
  7.3	Seakeeping Performance Criteria and Ship Sea- 
way   Response•.	In general usage, the words index
  

(a)	Amplitudes of motion, such as absolute 
displace- ments and roll, pitch, and yaw angles of the 
ship.
  (b)	Absolute vertical, transverse, and longitudinal 
velocities and accelerations of points at selected lo- 
cations on the ship with respect to the earth.
  (c)	Relative vertical displacements and velocities 
of points at selected locations on the platform with 
re- spect to the ocean surface at these locations.
  (d)	Relative motions between platform and 
aircraft. All twelve criteria of Table 19 may apply to 
both commercial and military ships. However, 
Criteria Nos. 3, 9 and 12 apply primarily to military 
ships. Criterion
6 is defined and discussed in Section 7.6.
  There is a fifth category of  seaway  responses  that 
is important to some ships but  is not reflected  in any 
of the criteria of Table 19. This category is:
  (e ) Vertical, transverse, and longitudinal displace- 
ments, velocities and accelerations of platform or 
pay- load components with respect to the ship, caused 
by ship motions.
  This category includes the motions of ship or 
payload components sliding on a ship's deck because 
of the motions of the ship. Aspects of these motions 
are fur- ther discussed at the end of this subsection, 
but  data are scarce.
  The evaluation of the long-term seakeeping per- 
formance of a proposed new design, to operate on an 
assigned mission in a specified environment 
(Sections
7.7 and 7.8), involves the comparison of calculated 
re- sponses against the prescribed values of the 
appro- priate criteria, such as those given 
subsequently in Table 20 and discussed fully in 
Sections 7.4 and 7.6,  for many short-term situations. 
The actual  values  of the responses measure the 
severity of the motions and the frequency of the 
seakeeping-related events that a ship experiences 
while at sea. How to predict these values  is the  
major  subject  of Sections  3, 4, and  5 of


 



this chapter.
  The actual values of all responses, except those in- 
volving the motions of a body independent of the ship 
platform (like Criterion No. 12 of Table 19, are totally 
dependent on the motions of the ship in the seaway. 
Hence the values of the responses corresponding to 
Criteria 1 through 7 are directly calculable from the 
response spectra associated with  Categories  (a)  and 
(b). The motion sickness corresponding to Criterion No. 
6 is assumed to be dependent on the values of vertical 
acceleration and on the frequency of occurrence of 
those values of acceleration, as discussed in Section
7.6. Under Criterion No.7 the actual values of peak 
vertical acceleration due to slamming are difficult to 
calculate because they are the result of a transient 
event. The actual values of the responses correspond- 
ing to Criteria Nos. 8-11, category (c), can be calcu- 
lated using the methods of Sections 4 and 5 to obtain 
the spectra of responses at different speeds and head- 
ings in representative sea spectra. Finally, the actual


values of response for Criterion No. 12 are calculable 
from the spectra of the vertical velocities of Category
(b) for both the flight deck and the aircraft. (A more 
accurate but much more expensive determination  of 
the values of these responses can be obtained by re- 
peated time domain solutions).
  A short-term evaluation of ship performance can be 
obtained by making systematic calculations of the 
var- ious responses at different speeds and headings 
in spe- cific sea conditions, as defined by their 
directional sea spectra. Results can then be plotted on 
the basis of speed. For any specific set of 
performance criteria, the speeds at which the criteria 
will be met can then be determined for any 
combination of sea state and ship heading. Such plots 
form the basis for the long-term evaluations discussed 
in Sections 7.7 and 7.8.
  The ship response spectra mentioned in the 
previous paragraphs can be calculated by a Standard 
Ship Mo- tion Program, utilizing the most suitable of 
the pro- cedures described in Sections 3 and 4, as 
published by


142	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


Meyers,  et  al  (1981). Some users  of  this (and other)	to be made of limits associated with different levels of 
programs  have developed their own extensions to time-	performance.
domain solutions.			Actually, the prescribed values are largely judgment 
Baitis,  et  al  (1976b) utilized earlier  versions of the	values coming from the experience and knowledge of 
above  standard   program   to  create a  comprehensive		those who formulate the operational requirements for 
ship  motion  data  base,  including  both frequency  do-		ships, the medical profession concerned with human 
main  and  time   domain  responses,   for  five current		performance, the naval architects and other engineers 
classes of Navy ships. A somewhat less comprehensive		concerned with the design and performance of the ship 
data  base  exists  for  four  classes  of U.S. commercial		and its subsystems, the various kinds of engineers 
ships and for  several  liquefied natural  gas (LNG) car-		concerned  with  the  mission systems,  and-most	im- 
riers  (S. Bales, et  a11975) (Baitis,  et  aI1976a).  Such		portant-the	officers and men who operate the sys-
data bases are useful for readily obtaining seaway terns. Each of the prescribed values is viewed by these 
performance information on existing ships, either for people as a reasonable, average operational limit as- 
comparison  with  similar  information  on new designs  sociated  with  no significant  impairment  of  functions 
or for use in the design of new ship systems and / or or degradation of performance (unless otherwise 
components, Section 4.	stated) in one of the following three categories:
  While a frequency-domain  data  base  is sufficient to	(a) Personnel 
calculate  the  actual  values  of most  responses of spe-	• Comfort
cific ships,  it is not  sufficient for  the responses corre-	• Motion sickness 
sponding  to  all applicable criteria.  Vehicle motions in	• Personnel fatigue 
the time domain are often desirable for the four classes	• Task proficiency 
of criteria that:	• Safety
  (a)	Involve the relative  motion of two bodies whose	(b) Ship payload
motions are independent of one another (e.g., Criterion	• Helicopter and aircraft landing 
No.  12 of Table 19).•		Cargo shifting.
  (b)	Involve highly nonlinear combinations of various	(c) The ship 
ship  motion  components  (e.g.,  shoring  forces on ob-	• Hull damage
jects  carried  on a  deck of  a  ship that  involve motion	• Deck equipment damage 
dependent  friction forces) .•		System damage
  (c)	Depend  on  the  joint (simultaneous)  occurrence	• System efficiency 
of any  two  or more independent  ship  motion compo-	• Propulsion plant.
nents exceeding a certain specified value  (e.g.,  a  cri-  The prescribed  values of the seakeeping  criteria  de- 
terion that stated that the  joint  probability  of  veloped for Categories (a)  and (b)  should be completely 
occurrence of roll = 5 deg  and  pitch =  2 deg  could  independent  of  sea,  wind, and  weather  conditions; 10- 
not be tolerated).	cation on the ship; or the presence  or absence of active
  (d)	Involve time  in an  absolute,  not relative, sense		motion controls. They are dependent on ship function 
(e.g., a criterion  that  states  that  a specified event can-		(mission) and crew experience, and may be dependent 
not  occur at  intervals  less  than  x seconds duration).		on ship type, size, and/ or mission duration. Similarly, 
These  considerations  account for the fact that many	the prescribed values of seakeeping criteria developed 
computer  programs,  as  well as  the  Baitis data base,		for Category (c) are also completely independent of 
have been  extended  to obtain time domain responses.		sea, wind, and weather conditions, and are dependent
  7.4	Prescribed  Limiting   Values   of   the  Seaway  Per-	on ship function. But they, unlike the preceding pre- 
formance   Criteria.	Giventhat  ship motions do degrade	scribed values, are dependent on location in the ship. 
the  performance  of elements  of the  total ship system,		Prescribed values for five different naval and four 
the   prescribed   limiting  values   of  the  seaway  per-	commercial ship configurations, taken from several 
formance  criteria   are  intended  to  correspond to the	sources, for the twelve seaway performance criteria 
boundary   between  acceptable  and unacceptable  per-	of Table 19 are given in Table 20 for several ship 
formance,  i.e., the limit of operability. Ideally, it would	functions. These values, and those given subsequently 
be very  helpful  if acceptability corresponded to an ab-	in Section 7.7, are the best currently available in the 
rupt  discontinuity in the relation  between motions and	literature, but uncertainties remain in regard to many 
performance   degradation.  In  reality  such abrupt  dis-	of them. Hence, they should be considered tentative 
continuities  do not,  of course,  exist. It  should be pos-	and subject to revision as more instrumented ship data 
sible, however, to establish  relationships in probability	become available. The five naval ship configurations 
terms  between  motions  and  degredation of perform-	include monohull, SWATH, planing, hydrofoil and sur- 
ance for  the  various  criteria  (referred  to as degrada-	face effect ships. Although not necessarily so specified 
tion functions	by  Comstock and  Keane (1980). Such	in each source, it may be assumed that  the  prescribed 
a  scheme  can  be  fully  realized only through  the col-	values of Table 20, except those for Criterion No.6, 
lection  and  statisticle   analysis   of  large amounts  of	correspond to observed average operational limits for 
service data.  It would permit  a more precise definition	no significant degredation of performance.




Table 20-Prescribed Values for the Twelve Performance Criteria of Table 19


i
-
z
?


1

2

3	0
-f
4	0z
VI
5	z
6
m
VI

8

9

10

11
12
Notes: All values of response (angles, displacements, accelerations) are rms (root mean square) peak-to-mean (single amplitude) values unless otherwise noted.
•	Extreme peak-to-mean value.
# See text, Section 7.6
Seakeeping Performance Criteria-Table 2


144	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


  The prescribed values of the criteria of Table 20, in 10 governing. However, in a heavy condition of loading 
accordance with a principle stated early in this section, (large draft  and smaller freeboard),  the  slamming cri- 
can be applied to any location aboard ship. However, terion is governing only in the upper 20 percent of the 
because most of the actual values of the responses speed regime, whereas the wetness criterion is gov- 
corresponding to the criteria are very location depen- erning over most of the speed range.
dent (the  only two exceptions are  Criteria 1 and 2) .use		7.6   Discussion  of Prescribed  Values.	The bases for 
of   the  seaway  perfor~ance	method~logy  reqUIres		the prescribed values, identified by the criteria num- 
knowledge of the locatIOns to be consIdered. The 10- bers and column numbers of Table 20 are discussed 
cation~ at  which  respo~se~ should  be compared with		in this section. For SES, monohull: planing and 
prescrIbed values of .Cn~na   3 th.rou~h 12 of ~able 20		SWATH ships, some information concerning the gov- 
are  as  follo~s,  consIdenng  10ngItudmal, vertIcal and		erning seakeeping criteria is also given. It will be clear 
later~l c~ordma~s:.			from the discussion below that all prescribed values 
Cntena   3: Hebcopter landmg pad.	are  tentative	subject to revision as information ac-
Criteria  4,  5  &  6: All locations  in  the ship where	cumulates.	'
pe~sonnel  eat,   sleep,  and   work   (and on  passenger			(a) Criterion No.1: Rms (root mean square) roll 
ShIP~,r~create) ...		angle. Motion sickness or nausea has a long historical 
CrItena  7  & 8: For  pla~mg craft, hy?rO~Olls,SES,	connection with the rolling of ships at sea (the word
and ACVs: The same locatIOnsas for  CrItena  4, 5 and	nausea  comes from  the  Greek  word  "naus" meaning
6.	For  ~onohulls and SWATHs:	ship).  However,  the   research   of  0 'Hanlon  and Mc-
  ~atIOns	that are dependent on hull fullness and		Cauley (1973) revealed that it is the vertical acceler- 
parti~ularly  on the  extent  of  the  ~at  o~ bottom. T~e		ations associated with roll angle, pitch angle and heave 
location assumed fo~ the  values  gIven m Table .20 ~s  (not the  roll angle  itself)  occurring  within a very nar- 
15 percent of the ShIPlength. abaft the bo~,  WhIChIS row band of frequencies,  all well below one hertz, that the  
yalue  for the  528-ft Marmer  cargo  ShIP used by		induce motion sickness. As a result of this research, 
OChIand Motter (1973).		discussed further under Criterion No. 6 none of the 
C~te~on  9: The  locatio~ of  the sonar dome.	prescribed values for roll angle in Tabl~ 21 were de- 
CnterIOn 10: Any  locatIOnon or  above  the deck of	termined on the basis of motion sickness. Rather  the the  
ship  where  personnel,  payload,  ship structure  or		basis  for  each value of the roll angle criteria  in  Table
ship systems  may be injured  or damaged by impacting	20 is as follows:
sea ~atE;r..			Cols. (1), (3) and (10); 9.6 deg: Olson (1977) could 
C~te~on  11: The locatIOn~f the  propeller ..  ,	not really substantiate this relatively large value; al- 
Cnterla  3 a~d 12: The locatIon (called the bull s eye)	though he related it to personnel effectiveness. It is 
where  the  helIcopters .are launched and recover.ed..		interesting to observe in the summary of Olson's work 
Each. of the. ~rescrI~ed values of Table 20 IS dIS- by Mandel (1979) that, in spite of its large magnitude, cussed  
m detaIl m SectIon 7.6.		this prescribed value caused roll angle to be the gov-
  7.5	Governing Criteria. For a given ship, in a given erning criterion for monohulls for the  transit-alone 
condition of loading,  operating  in  a  given  sea  state,  function  in 75 out of 80 possible cases  at  a ship-wave 
the prescribed values of one  or  more  criteria  from  heading  angle  of  75  deg  (285  deg),  where  180 deg 
Table 20 will constrain ship speed and ship-wave head- represents  head  seas.  Roll  angle  was  also  the  most 
ing direction. These criteria are called the governing prevalent governing criterion at all ship-wave heading 
criteria. The governing criteria  will change  as  speed  angles between 50 deg (310 deg) and 82 deg (278 deg). 
and ship-wave heading direction are altered, and they  (Olson's  work  covered  four  different  military  mono- 
will also change  as  the  sea  state  changes.  Insuring  hulls  operating  at  five different speeds in seas  of four 
that  the  governing  criteria  are identified for  each sea  different  modal  periods).  In  contrast,  for  SWATH 
state and each ship condition requires that all of the ships, roll angle with this same prescribed value  is 
seakeeping criteria applicable to the ship and to its never a governing criterion.
function(s)  be individually considered.			Col. (2); 4 deg: The given basis  for  the value  is 
The  governing  criteria  for  a  given mission, speed,	personnel considerations; it is not related to limits on and  
heading  may  also be  different for different ships		ship or mission equipment or to the ship itself. There 
of the  same  general  type  and  may  even be different		is some evidence that this prescribed value is unduly
for  the  same  ship  in  different  conditions of loading.	restrictive for the transit function.
The  latter  point  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  109 for  ahead   Col. (5); 1.25 deg: Stark  (1977) suggests  this value  
seas. In a light condition of loading (shallow draft and as an  approximate  guideline  for  subsequent  combat 
large freeboard) the  governing  criterion  for  a  mono·  system  requirements,  to  ensure  crew  proficiency in 
hull performing the transit function is the slamming rough water and to constrain structural loads on equip- 
frequency criterion No. 8 for the greater part of the ment located at ship extremities.
speed regime.  Only at  speeds  in the  lower 28 percent		Col. (6); 1.5 deg: The significance of this value for 
of the  speed regime  is the  deck wetness Criterion No.	rms roll (and pitch) angle)s that in unpublished sim-


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	145


ulation studies this value was never exceeded in sea  eration  of human  effectiveness, a 2.4 deg rms  pitch is 
states where Criterion No.4 (rms vertical acceleration) frequently cited as  an  operational  limit on  ship  sub- 
with the prescribed value of O.lg (given in Column 6 systems such as replenishment-at-sea equipment."
of  Table  20)  was  governing.   Presumably the  actual	(c) Criterion No.3; Rms vertical displacement.
rms  value  of roll and pitch angle  could be larger than	The consideration  behind Criterion  No.3  is the ability
1.5 deg without reducing task proficiency or increasing	of the flight deck crew to safely handle helicopters 
motion  sickness  so  long  as  the  prescribed   value  of	before launch and at recovery. The prescribed rms 
Criterion  No.4    was  not  exceeded.  This  is in accord	single amplitude value of 4.17 ft (1.26m) entered in 
with the findings of O'Hanlon and McCauley (1973) Table 20, was obtained from Baitis (1975) and Olson 
mentioned  in the  introduction  to this subsection.	(1977). Olson's results show that this prescribed value 
Because of uncertainties, data on ACVs are not in- caused Criterion No.3 to be the  major  governing cri- cluded 
in Table 21. However, a prescribed value of 3.4 terion for the helicopter launch and recovery functions deg  for  
rms  roll  was  obtained  from actual measure-	at all ship-wave heading angles between 120 deg and 
ments  by  Wachnik  and  Pierce  (1967) on one of Eng-	240 deg and between 0 (360 deg) and 40 deg (320 deg) 
land's   cross-channel,  passenger-carrying  SRN4 class	for monohulls and between  0  (360  deg)  and 75 deg 
of  ACV's  in  seas  of  8.9  ft  (2.7m)  significant  wave	(285 deg) for SWATH ships. However, Fig. 115 dis- 
height  as  measured  by wave buoys at  selected points	cussed in the next section shows Criterion No. 12, not 
on the  route.  The  significance of this  sea condition is	Criterion No.3, to be the governing criterion for the 
that  is  represents   the  level  of  sea  severity at which	helicopter launch and recovery function. Hence, these
the   operators   of  these   vehicles  suspend them  from	Olson results should be considered tentative.
service because  of passenger  intolerance, although the		(d) Criteria Nos. .4 and 5; Rms vertical and lateral 
vehicles  themselves  could tolerate  more severe seas.	accelerations. The close relation between Criteria 4 & 
Since these vehicles are engaged in a strictly com- 5 and personnel fatigue and reduced task proficiency mercial,  
profit-motivated  service,  the  decision to sus-	have been recognized for decades. Prescribed values 
pend service is not taken  lightly. Furthermore,  the fact	of these two criteria at frequencies above 1 Hertz and 
that  these  vehicles have  been  in service  for well over	in  association  with  stated  time  durations have been 
a decade means  that  such  decisions are  based on firm	promulgated by the International Standards Organi-
knowledge  of passenger   tolerance  of severe motions.	zation (ISO, 1978) and used as military standards 
However,  based  on experience  with the  SES as noted	(MIL-STD-1472)for many years.
in the  discussion  of the  prescribed  values  of Col. (6),		At frequencies lower than  1 hertz,  which were not 
it is likely that  the true  governing  criterion  for ACV's  included in ISO standards,   Stark  (1977) adopted fre- 
is  the  rms  vertical  acceleration  with  a  value of O.lg		quency weighted values of the vertical acceleration 
from Column (6), not the rms roll angle of the pre- using  the  Motion Sickness Incidence discussed  in the 
ceding paragraph.		next section. These are the values in Table 20, Column 
Cols. (7) and  (8); 3.2 deg  and 2.5 deg: These values	5. Virtually identical values of vertical acceleration 
prescribed  by  Olson (1977) and  Comstock and Keane	obtained from the simulation tests of SES's and from 
(1980) for monohull (and also SWATH) ships launch- the  trials  of the  SRN4 class  of  ACVs are reported  in 
ing or  recovering  helicopters  are  both  based on work		Column (6) of Table 20. Aertssen (1968) gives much 
by Baitis (1975). They are  intended  to define  the safe		larger limiting values for commercial vessels (Columns
limits for  the  personnel  who are  out on deck handling	11-14).
helicopter launch or recovery. The summary of Olson's Stark's (1977) prescribed value  for  rms  lateral  ac- 
(1977) report by Mandel (1979) shows that these pre- celeration (Criterion 5) in Column  (5)  is  0.06g.  He 
scribed values caused roll angle to be  the  most prev-  states  that  he obtained this value by extrapolating  the 
alent governing criterion for the four monohull  MIL-STD value (for  a four-hour  duration  limit) which 
destroyers treated by Olson performing the helicopter is constant at frequencies between 1 and 2 hertz down 
launch or recovery function at all ship-wave heading to the synchronous rolling frequency of hydrofoil craft 
angles between 40 deg (320  deg)  and  100 deg  (260  (-  0.25 hertz).  The prescribed  value  of this  criterion 
deg). For SWATH, the prescribed value of 3.2 deg  for  SES's  in Column (6)  is related  to  turning  charac- 
causes  roll  angle  to  be  governing  in one case  out  of  teristics,  not to motions in waves (see Chapter  VI), as 
32 at ship-wave heading angles between 40 deg (320  is the value for monohull ships in Columns (2) and (8).  
deg)  and  70 deg  (290 deg),  one SWATH operating  at  A  recent  approach  developed  from  that  of  Stark 
eight different speeds in seas of four different modal (1977) for evaluating human performance limits is de- 
periods.	scribed in Dept. of Defense publication (DOD, 1981).
  (b)	Criterion   No.2;   Rms  pitch  angle.  The  bases    (e)  Criterion  No.6;  Motion  sickness  incidence.  In  
for each of the prescribed values of pitch angle in Table  the  early  1970's, 0 'Hanlon,  et  aI,  (1973)  conducted 
20 are the  same  as  those  for  roll angle.  With respect  experiments  with a group of young men, unacclimated 
to the value in Column 9, Olson (1977) states,  "While  to motions, subjecting  them  to  a  series  of single  fre- 
we found no specific pitch criterion based on consid- quencies of vertical sinusoidal motion (no roll motion).


146	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



The results of these experiments were expressed ill 
terms of a Motion Sickness Incidence, MSI, which is 
defined as the percent of individuals who would become 
physically ill if subjected to motions of prescribed char· 
acteristics  for  a given time interval  tl•     Results  of the
o'Hanlon,  et aI, experiments  in the form of values  of
rms vertical acceleration and frequency corresponding 
to four  different combinations of values  of MSI and tl 
are plotted in Fig. 111.This figure shows that at a rms 
vertical acceleration value of 1 m / s 2 (0.1g), 20 percent 
of unacclimated men threw up in two hours, at fre- 
quencies of 0.1 and 0.29 hertz (periods of 3.4 and 10 
sec). At frequencies (and periods) intermediate be- 
tween these two sets of values, the MSI  value  is 
greater than 20 percent. At a rms vertical  acceleration 
of 2 m/s2,	35 percent of such people became sick in 
two hours at frequencies of 0.09and 0.34hertz (periods 
of 2.9 and 11.4 see). These ranges  of periods  happen 
to coincide fairly strongly with the actual  roll periods 
of most monohull ships, with synchronous rolling of 
such ships most  commonly occurring  in the  range  of 
6 to 25 sec. The 0'Hanlon, et aI, work revealed this 
coincidence of periods and thereby shed light on the 
historical association between ship roll angle and mo- 
tion sickness; it also simultaneously disclosed that it 
was not necessarily the roll  motion itself,  but  rather 
the vertical acceleration associated with roll, pitch and 
heave motion that may be the base cause of motion 
sickness ..
  Fig. 110also shows the very rapid decrease in motion 
sickness incidence with increase in period above the 
usual synchronous roll period  of ships. With increase 
in period above about 7 seconds (frequency below 0.14 
hertz), MSI decreases rapidly at all values of rms ver- 
tical  acceleration  above  about  1 m/s2	This  accounts 
for the great interest  on  the  part  of  naval  architects 
in the early years of this  century,  during  the  heyday 
of trans-Atlantic passenger liners,  in  increasing  the 
roll period of these ships by reducing the metacentric 
height. U.S. designers were more restricted in this 
regard than designers abroad because of the correct 
perception in the U.S. that the low metacentric heights 
needed to achieve long roll periods (see Chapter II) 
severely jeopardized damage stability and ship surviv- 
ability.
  The weakness of the O'Hanlon, et  al (1973) results 
of Fig. 110 is that their experiments were conducted 
with people totally unacclimated to motion. In reality, 
acclimation is a vitally important parameter in deter- 
mining motion sickness incidence. In a study in the 
Royal Navy it was shown that even at rms vertical



 


crews unacclimated to motion. For  non-passenger 
ships with crews acclimated to motions, it seems likely 
that, based on the O'Hanlon, et al data, a prescribed 
MSI value of 35 percent in conjunction with a t l-value 
of two hours would be adequate.
  Once MSI and tl-values are prescribed, the corre- 
sponding prescribed value of the rms vertical accel- 
eration (Criterion No.4) can be read from Fig. 110, 
using the estimated synchronous roll period of the 
ship or new design being considered. For example, if 
a ship has prescribed values of MSI = 35 percent 
and t 1  = 2 hrs and a natural roll period of 10 sec 
(natural fre- quency = 0.1 hertz), the prescribed 
upper limit of rms vertical acceleration read from 
Fig. 110 is 1.50 m / s 2. For prescribed values of 20 
percent and 10 percent, it drops to 1.05 and 0.7 m/s2,
	respectively.
  {f} Criterion No.7: Slamming acceleration. The 
occurrence of severe and frequent slamming is well 
recognized as a limitation on sea speed in rough seas. 
Its severity may be judged either by the high local


accelerations  greater  than  1.2 m/ sec2     associated with


vertical acceleration at impact or by the subsequent


MSI = 35 percent in Fig. 110, motion  sickness  was 
not the governing criterion because  the  sailors  were 
so acclimated to motion. It follows that the prescribed 
MSI values of 10 and 20 percent shown  in Table  20 
for monohulls, hydrofoil ships and SES are realistic 
only for passenger ships or for ships manned with


vibratory response (or whipping) experienced 
through- out the ship, involving both accelerations 
and hull bending stresses. The magnitude of local 
slamming acceleration at impact is often used as a 
criterion of seakeeping performance, especially for 
small craft. An accelerometer record near the bow 
may indicate either


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	147



a distinct peak in acceleration or a relatively small 
response superimposed on the acceleration due to or- 
dinary ship motions, as for a large mono-hull. The 
vertical motion of a light planing craft can be stopped 
dead by impact on the water surface, while the motion 
of a heavy ship will only be slightly modified.
  This difference has very significant ramifications. 
The very large peak slamming accelerations experi- 
enced with planing craft can be injurious, even lethal, 
as far as personnel are concerned (Payne,  1978). On 
the other hand, the smaller slamming accelerations 
experienced by large ships are not injurious to per- 
sonnel but may involve local structural damage and 
strong whipping stresses in the hull (Chapter IV, Vol. 
I).
  With planing craft, slamming introduces very large 
upward accelerations at very frequent  intervals  even 
in moderately rough seas. A small sample of a planing 
craft vertical acceleration time history in Sea State 
No.6, head seas, is shown in Fig. 111a. The frequent, 
large, upward accelerations are attributable to three 
planing craft features:
  1.	Relatively low deadrise hull shape, which results 
in a relatively large slamming impact  area  compared 
to a monohull.
  2.	Small displacement, which makes them much 
more responsive to impact loads.
  3.	High speed, which increases the frequency of 
wave encounter and of slamming severity in head seas. 
Because the upward  slamming acceleration  peaks on a 
planing craft are so frequent and so large (greater than 
LOg in Fig. 111), their Criterion No.7 value is dictated 
by human fatigue and proficiency considera- tions, not 
by fear of hull damage as it is on some large monohulls. 
On the other hand, because slamming ac-



celerations occur so frequently with planing craft and 
are so severe, other seakeeping  events  evidently  do 
not constrain its operations. For example, motion sick- 
ness does not appear to be an issue in high-speed plan- 
ing craft ride qualities at all, probably because the low-
frequency motions that induce seasickness are scarcely 
perceived by planing craft personnel sub- jected to the 
higher frequency, high-level slamming accelerations 
characteristic of these craft.  Evidently, the personnel 
who ride planing craft are expected to tolerate a much 
more severe ride than personnel on other vehicle 
types. See Payne (1978) for a good fur- ther discussion 
of ride quality criteria for craft subject to frequent 
slamming.
  Allen and Jones (1978) suggested  prescribed  peak 
of maximum values of slamming acceleration of 4.0g 
for 100-ton planing craft (for very short  exposure 
times of 20 minutes or less), as shown in Table 20.
  The peak slamming vertical acceleration value  of 
0.5g prescribed by Stark (1977) in Table 20 for hydro- 
foil craft (of unspecified size) in the foilborne 
condition for longer periods of time is far  below the  
peak value of 4.0g suggested by Allen and Jones 
(1978) for 100- ton planing craft. Stark's low 
prescribed value is a reflection of his firm view that 
slamming vertical ac- celeration represents the most 
severe constraint on hydrofoil seaway performance. 
His low prescribed value is intended to insure that 
human fatigue will not playa role in evaluating the 
quality of  the  hydrofoil ride in rough seas. Note the 
total absence of any peak slamming acceleration in the 
hydrofoil motion time history shown in Fig. 111b in 
extremely severe, Sea State 8, head seas.
  Stark's concern with slamming acceleration is as- 
sociated with the fact that as the foils of a hydrofoil




 

Fig. 111 Typical time histories of the vertical accelerotion of a planing boot ond 0 hydrofoil craft in head seas of stated severities (Mandel, 1979)


148	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


ship come close to the surface in rough  water,  they  tion  value  of  0.2g  obtained  from  records  in this  sea 
may emerge and the lift they provide may momentarily  state  was, therefore,  taken  as the  prescribed  value of 
go to zero. This condition is referred to asfoil broach-  Criterion  No.7  for  monohulls. However,  this  should 
ing. For severe broaches, large downward vehicle ac- be taken as only a rough guide for large ships; the 
celerations will occur and subsequent to a broach, the frequency  of slamming  (Criterion  No.8),  or the  mag- 
hull itself will slam into the oncoming wave crest. The nitude of midship slam stress, may be considered more 
upward acceleration associated with this slam will be reliable for such ships (Aertssen, 1968).The prescribed 
larger than  the  downward  accelerations  associated  values for trawlers  and cross-channel vessels (columns 
with broaching. The values of the slamming acceler- 13 and 14) are also from Aertssen (1968).
ation peaks  thus  become the  constraining  limit on hy-			(g) Criterion No.8: Slamming frequency. While 
drofoil  operations  in extremely severe seas.		peak slamming acceleration is an adequate criterion 
SES's   and   ACV's   also   experience slamming.  In	for part of the ride quality evaluation of SES, hydro- 
heavy  seas,  the  pitch angle  of these  vehicles may be-		foil, and planing craft, it is not an adequate criterion 
come so large that there  is leakage of cushion air from		for assessing the importance of slamming on large 
under  the  bow seal. If this  occurs, the resulting down-		monohull and  SWATH  ships.  In  the  opinion  of 
ward  acceleration  of  the  bow  will cause large  slam-		Aertssen and van Sluijs (1972), and other investiga- 
ming accelerations.		tors, it is the frequency of occurrence of severe slams, 
The prescribed  slamming  acceleration peak value of	in addition to excessive slamming accelerations and 0.6g 
for the  2,000-3,00o-ton SES in Table 20 conforms		vibratory whipping that induces a ship captain to slow 
to  the  values  (0.55g  to  0.70g)  for 2,000-3,00o-ton ve-		his ship's speed or change its course. Tick (1958) and 
hicles given by Allen and Jones  (1978). Mandel (1979)		others postulated that a severe slam occurs on mo- 
gives a similar value  for  an ACV. As with hydrofoils,		nohulls when two events occur simultaneously. These
the  effect of  slamming  accelerations  on personnel fa-	two events are:
tigue  and  crew proficiency is a cause  of  very serious		• Reentry of the ship's bow into the water after it 
concern  with  SES vehicles, and  active motion allevia-	has risen above the surface.
tion  systems  may be  essential  for them .•		The relative vertical velocity between the ship's 
Allen  and Jones  (1978) suggest  that the prescribed	flat of bottom and the water surface exceeds a certain
peak  value  of the  slamming  acceleration  should be a	critical specified value.
function of ship size to reflect the very different impact     This critical vertical velocity value, according to Ochi 
of slamming  on large  ships, like monohulls, compared  and  Motter  (1973), is  12 ft  per  see (3.66 m / s)  for  a 
to  small ships like planing  craft.  Hence they  suggest  520-ft (158m) ship, at a point 15 percent of length from  
an extreme peak-to-mean value of 0.5g for 4,000-ton the bow. Calculations indicate that the Ochi, Motter 
monohulls. In this case slamming introduces large im- critical velocity corresponds  to  a slam of considerable 
pact pressures acting on a  limited area  of the  ship's  magnitude.  For  ship  lengths  other  than  158m., the 
bottom which may cause local ship structural  damage,  value  of the  critical  vertical  velocity may be  obtained 
or it may introduce  large  whipping  stresses  in  the  by means of Froude  scaling. The location at which this 
ship's hull. However, slamming generates smaller rel- velocity is  to  be  measured  actually  depends  on  hull 
ative upward acceleration peaks on monohulls than on fullness and particularly on the extent of the  flat  of 
planing craft because of the usually larger size (dis- bottom (Section 5).
placement)  of  monohulls  and  their  hull shape which			A method of predicting the joint probability of fo- 
greatly   reduces  the  area   of  the  hull  impacted by a		refoot emergence and relative vertical velocity  ex- 
slam.  As previously  noted  therefore,  the  motion of a		ceeding a critical value is given by Ochi (1964) and 
ship is only slowed by a  slam,  not  stopped  as is often		Ochi and Motter (1973). Aertssen (1968) states that a 
the  case  with planing craft.		commercial ship captain will slow down or alter course 
In  spite  of the  emphasis  on peak values of acceler-	if a severe slam occurs more frequently than 3 to 6 
ation,in the previous paragraph,  the  prescribed values		times in 100 ship-wave encounters, depending on the of  
slamming  acceleration  given  in  Table  20 for  mo-		type of vessel, as shown in Table 20. A frequency of 
nohulls  are   single  amplitude  rms  accelerations,  not			3 times in 100 cycles is equivalent to one slam every 
peak values.  Unfortunately   these  are  the only values			2 to 5 minutes, or a slamming frequency of 12-30 per 
recorded  in the  literature   for  these ship types.			hour, depending on ship size. Since pitch natural period 
The prescribed  value  of 0.2g rms  for  monohulls in	tends to increase with length of ship (Mandel, 1960), 
Columns (1),  (7)  and  (9)-(12)  of Table  20  were cal-		the number of pitch cycles per unit time tends to de- 
culated  from spectral  analysis  of vertical acceleration			crease with increasing length. The range 12-30 per 
records  taken  during  special trials  of a large contain-			hour spans the average value given in Columns (2) 
ership and reported  by Aertssen  and van Sluijs (1972).			and (8), from Comstock, et al (1980). Bales (1978)
During these  trials,  the ship motions became so severe	suggests similar values.
that   the   captain  slowed  the  ship, fearing  slamming		Fig. 111 shows an interval of only 1.7 seconds be- 
damage  to  the  hull. The  actual  rms vertical accelera-	tween two slams of a planing craft, corresponding to


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES'	149


a frequency of 35 slams per minute. This should be hulls. Bales (1978) suggests a similar value, but  An- 
compared to the prescribed slam frequency (Criterion drew and Lloyd (1981)suggest 90 wetnesses  per  hour 
No.8) value of 12 to 30 slams per hour for monohulls, for the prescribed value for  frigates,  and Aertssen,  in 
given  in the previous paragraph.	a discussion of the Andrew and Lloyd paper, suggests
  In  the  case  of SWATH ships,  Criterion No.8 is not	36 wetnesses per hour as the prescribed value for 
related  to  slamming  frequency  but  rather  to the fre-	containerships, or 5 per 100 cycles (Aertssen, 1968). 
quency  of contact  between  a wave and the underdeck		Olson's results show that for the four destroyer-like 
of the  cross  structure   of the  SWATH. Evidently, the	ships he analyzed, his prescribed value resulted in deck 
flat  underdeck  of  this  structure   and the confinement	wetness being the governing  criterion  in only six out 
of the  water  by the  side struts  cause  wave contact to	of a possible 80 cases  at  ship-wave  heading  angles 
be  a  significant  seakeeping  event  for SWATH ships.	between 160 and 200 deg. According to Table 20, deck 
According  to  Lamb  (1975), the prescribed  frequency	wetness is evidently an important seaway performance 
of  wave  contacts  for  SWATH's occurs  when the av-	criterion only for monohulls.
erage  of  the  1/  10-highest values  of  the  relative  ver-     (j)  Criterion      No.      11:      Propeller      emerg- 
tical displacement, between the  underdeck  of  the  ence.  Propeller  emergence  in severe  seas,  resulting 
SWATH and the rough sea surface beneath it, exceeds  in  propeller  racing,  is  a  common  event  with  single- 
the  smooth  water  clearance  to the underdeck.	screw merchant ships, particularly those that are die-
  Olson (1977) results show for the SWATH ship of sel  propelled,  and  with  SWATH ships.  By observing 
Table 20 that this prescribed value resulted in Criterion when the chief engineer ordered  a  reduction  in pro-  
No.8 being the governing  criterion  for  the  SWATH  peller  RPM because  of racing,  Aertssen  (1966)estab- 
ship functions of Table 20, at all  ship-wave heading  lished for a single-screw diesel cargo ship a prescribed 
angles between 130 and 230 deg (180 deg represents value of  25 propeller  emergences  per  100 ship  oscil- 
ahead seas) in more than 20 out of a possible 32 cases. lations.
Thus wave contact is a very significant seaway per- According to Olson (1977),the criterion for SWATH 
forrnance  criterion  for SWATH ships.	ships is the probability that the vertical displacement
  (h)   Criterion    No.   9  Frequency   of sonar   dome	of the propeller relative to the free surface of the water 
emergence.  While the  ping of a sonar  is a short pulse,	will not cause more  than  25 percent  of the  disk  area 
a  long listening  period, called the  ping  interval, is re-	of the propeller to emerge. This prescribed value for 
quired  after  the  ping in order  to be able to detect the	the 3,350-ton SWATH ship of Table 20, according to 
returning  target  echo. The duration of the ping interval	Lamb (1975), corresponds to the  significant value  of  
is a  direct  function  of the  range  of .the sonar and the	vertical displacement of the propeller relative to the 
speed  of sound  in water.  If  an  active search is being	surface of the water not exceeding 12.8 ft (3.90 m). 
conducted  out  to  a  range   of  10 miles, Olson (1977)		Olson's results show that with this prescribed value 
suggests a ping interval of about 30 seconds. In order	propeller  emergence  is a  significant  governing  crite- 
to receive an echo back from a target located anywhere	rion for the SWATH ship transit function of Table 20 
from 0 to 10 miles away, the sonar dome must remain	at all ship-wave heading angles. At ship-wave heading 
completely submerged during the entire ping interval.	angles betwen 0 (360 deg) and 110 deg (250 deg), it is 
For longer sonar ranges, the sonar dome must remain	the governing criterion in well over a fourth of the 32 
completely submerged for much longer intervals (Fig.	SWATH cases.
112 of Section 7.7).	(k) Criterion No. 12; Rms relative vertical veloc-
  The  prescribed  value  of  Criterion  9 in Table 20 is	ity.	The prescribed value of Criterion No. 12 is in- 
120 sonar   dome  emergences   per  hour, which corre-	tended to limit the maximum impact forces sustained 
sponds  approximately  to  Olson's (1977) ping interval	by the helicopter landing gear during  recovery  oper- of 
30 seconds.  Of course, the  prescribed  value of 120	ations. According to Olson (1977)the maximum allow- 
emergences   per   hour  does  not  insure   that all ping	able significant relative velocity between the SH2F 
intervals will be longer than 30 seconds. If this sacrifice	(Lamps) helicopter and the flight deck is approximately 
in precision is not  acceptable  a more refined probabil-	12 ft/ see (3.65 m/ s). This corresponds to the pre- ity-
based  solution  could  be  obtained. Although time-	scribed 1.83 m / s rrns value given in Column 7 for 
domain calculations  may  seem to provide a more def-	monohulls in Table 20. Since the SH2F helicopter has 
inite  answer,   they   actually  must  be repeated  many	a sink rate of 5 ft/sec (1.52m/ s), this implies a limiting 
times  to provide  a reliable statistical  conclusion.	significant vertical velocity of the ship relative to the
  (i)	Criterion   No.   10:   Deck   wetness   fre-    earth  of 2.13 m/s   (7 ft/sec).   Although  Olson's results 
quency.  Olson (1977)states,  "... it is suggested  that  show  that  with  the  1.83 m/ s  rrns  prescribed  value, 
ships rarely choose to take green water over the bow Criterion  No.  12 was  never  a governing  criterion  for 
more than once every 2 to 5 minutes especially if gun the monohulls he treated, it was the major governing 
mounts, missile launchers,  or  major  deck equipment  criterion  for  SWATH ships  at  ship-wave heading  an- 
are located forward." Thirty wetnesses per hour was gles between 85 deg (275 deg) and 120 deg (240 deg). 
selected by Olson as the prescribed value for mono- However, more recent NAVSEA analysis has shown


150






































Fig.  112  Speed-polar   plot,  showing  Seakeeping   Operating   Envelopes  (SO E)  and   Operability   Index   (0.1.)   values   for  a  destroyer   in  sea   state   6.  (Transit 
and/or sonar search functions)

that  with  a lower prescribed  significant value  of  0.67  These steps  permit  us to predict  performance  in as- 
mls  (flight deck with  respect  to  the  earth),  Criterion  sumed conditions under  which ship loading, sea state, 
No. 12 is the governing criterion for a destroyer per- ship speed and heading remain essentially constant and 
forming the helicopter recovery function at all  ship  hence to evaluate  short-term  performance. We are now 
wave heading angles between 70 deg and 290 deg (head ready to proceed to the  problem of evaluating  long-  
seas correspond to 180 deg). This is shown  subse-  term  seakeeping  performance,  considering profiles of 
quently in Fig.  U5b.  Comstock,  et  al  (1980) give  a  missions,  loadings,  sea  conditions,  headings  and 
limiting value for monohulls of only 1.0 mIs,  Column  speeds,  in  short,  determining  values  of  a  Ship  Per- 
(8).	formance Index, as defined and discussed in Sections
  7.7	Step. In Obtaining the Seakeeping Performance	7.1 and 7.3, for any new or existing  ship design. This  
Index   SPI-l.  '  So far  in  Section  7 we  have dealt  pri-	can be accomplished in various ways, but the method 
marily  with  the  concept  of seakeeping  performance	of  Comstock, et al (1980), as effectively used in U.S. 
criteria, the nature of these criteria for different ship	Navy preliminary design, will be described  here. 
missions,  available  data  on limiting or prescribed val-		(a)  Speed polar  plot.	The first step is to adopt a 
ues  of  the   criteria,   and  methods  of using  available	method of presenting results of many short-term per- 
theoretical   techniques   to  calculate actual  short-term	formance evaluations (Section 7.3)in a convenient man- 
responses.	nero This can be done by means of the Speed Polar


MOTIONS IN WAVES	151



Plot utilized extensively by Comstock, et al (1980), 
which is aI) ideal vehicle for displaying the boundaries 
between ship speeds and ship-wave heading angles 
associated with acceptable motions and those associ- 
ated with unacceptable motions in a  particular  sea 
state. Here "acceptable" is used in the sense that the 
prescribed values correspond to impairment of func- 
tion if the prescribed value is exceeded, i.e., that the 
ship is operable (Section 7.4).
  Fig. 112 shows such a speed polar plot for a large 
destroyer performing the transit and sonar search 
functions in rough seas corresponding to Sea State 
Number 6. The limits on ship's speed and  heading 
angle imposed by the Comstock, et al (1980)prescribed 
values of Criteria Numbers 2, 8 and 10 of Table 20, 
Column 2, are shown on Fig. 112, as well as the limits 
on ship's speed and heading angle imposed by a pre- 
scribed rms roll value  of  5 deg  on Criterion  Number 
1 (in lieu of 4 deg by Comstock, 1980) and by a pre- 
scribed value of 24 sonar dome emergences per hour 
imposed by Criterion Number 9 (in lieu of 120per hour 
by Olson, 1977). It is clear from Fig. 112 that for the 
sonar search function the latter two criteria (i.e., 1 and
9) with their prescribed values are the governing cri- 
teria for this particular destroyer. For the transit func- 
tion alone, Fig. 112 shows that  the  roll angle  limit of 
5 deg and the pitch angle limit of 1~ deg make Criteria 
Nos. 1 and 2 the governing criteria.
  (b)	Seakeeping   operating   envelope.	The bound- 
ary of the operable regime of speeds and headings, 
shown unshaded in Fig. 112 (for the sonar search func- 
tion), is called the Seakeeping Operating Envelope 
(SOE) (Comstock, et al 1980). Roughly speaking, the 
bigger the unshaded area within  the  SOE the  better 
the seakeeping performance of the ship. But more 
quantitative conclusions can also be drawn; for ex- 
ample, it is clear that at certain ship-wave heading 
angles, operability is independent of speed (e.g., 0, 90, 
270 deg in Fig. 112). On the other hand, with speed 
fixed there are some headings that are operable and 
some that are not. Furthermore, the  fraction  of time 
the ship is able to perform its stated function at a 
particular speed and sea state can be obtained, assum- 
ing equal probability of all headings, by taking  the 
ratio of the total angle  subtended  by  the  unshaded 
arcs around any constant-speed circle to 360 deg. Thus 
at a speed of 10 knots the designated sonar search 
function will not be constrained in Sea State 6 by sea- 
keeping considerations in about 39 percent of all pos- 
sible ship-wave heading angles; at 15 knots this 
increases to 42 percent and at  all speeds between  20  
to 29 knots to about 45 percent. These values corre- 
spond to what Comstock, et al (1980), call the Oper- 
ability Index (01), based on the assumption that all 
possible heading angles are equally probably for the 
sonar search function. If, in addition, use of all possible 
speeds were equally probable for the sonar search 
function, the OI value in Sea State 6 would be ap-



proximately equal to the  ratio  of the  unshaded  area of 
Fig. 112 to the area of the  whole polar  diagram. The 
ratio of those areas for the sonar search  function in the 
figure is 0.45.
  (c)	Operability Index. Data like  those  shown  in Fig. 
112 are needed to calculate 01 even if all speeds and all 
headings are not equally probable. To deter- mine the 
value of 01 for other distributions of speed and heading 
angle it is necessary to segregate the speeds and 
headings of Fig. 112into discrete elemental areas and to 
estimate (visually if necessary) the local probability, Pi' 
within each elemental area that the ship's function can be 
accomplished. For example the value of Pi within the 
elemental area

 


152	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



An example of such specification with elemental areas 
contained within broadband widths of 5 knots and 30 
deg heading angle is shown on Fig. 113.Assuming the 
variables to be independent, the data of Figs. 112 and 
113 may be combined to calculate the overall 01 for 
any specified distribution of speeds and heading angles 
thus,

 
Table 21 shows for the destroyer of Fig. 111 perform- 
ing the sonar search function that the overall 01 value 
in Sea State Number 6 for the speed and heading 
distributions of Fig. 112 is 0.453 (Row 15, Co!. 11).The 
value in Co!. 10, Row 16 of Table 21 indicates that the 
overall 01 value, if all speeds between 15 and 30 knots 
and all headings were equally  probable,  is  virtually 
the same in this case. If  all speeds between  zero and 
30 knots and all heading angles were equally probable, 
the 01 value is 0.45 for the sonar search function, as 
indicated in Fig. 112. On the other hand, if the ship- 
wave heading angles are restricted to head and bow 
seas (120 deg ~ ,." ~ 240 deg), the 01 value is reduced 
to zero for any speed or combination of speeds.
  For the transit alone function, the 01 value calcul- 
able from Fig. 112 increases (in Sea State 6) to over 
0.50, assuming equal probability of all possible speeds 
and headings, but only to 0.02 if the  heading  angles 
are restricted to 120 deg ~ ,." ~ 240 deg.
  The operational significance of these 01 values  is 
that they correspond to the expected fraction  of time 
(or probability) that a ship can perform its designated 
ship functions in the designated sea state. That is, 
assuming that all ship speeds and all ship-wave head- 
ings are equally probable, the destroyer of  Fig.  112 
can be expected to perform the sonar search  function, 
at most, for 45 percent of the total time it operates in 
Sea State Number 6. This restriction is imposed solely 
by seakeeping considerations. Other important factors, 
such as visibility conditions, equipment failures, etc., 
which must be taken account of in the overall opera- 
tional evaluation of the ship, will restrict this  fraction 
of time even more..
  Plots similar to Fig. 112 can be prepared for  sea 
states other than Sea State 6, thus providing a concise 
picture of conditions for acceptable and for unaccept- 
able short-term performance-or	operability-for	one 
or more ship functions. A number of  01 curves  can 
then be plotted against Sea State Number, each for a 
different ship speed, provided equal probability of use 
of all possible ship-wave heading angles is assumed. 
This is done in Fig. 114 at 10, 20 and 30 knots for five 
ships of increasing displacements, all performing the 
full combat-support mission of Bales-Cieslowski(1981). 
The hull forms of all five ships correspond to the "op- 
timum" Bales-Cieslowski seakeeping hull. Using Fig. 
114 one can assess performance by interpolation, as- 
suming equal probability of all possible ship-wave


heading angles, under a variety of conditions, such as:
  •	What is the highest speed at which a ship of 
16,000 t can be expected to carry out full combat 
support in Sea State 6 at least 75 percent of the time? 
(16 knots).
  •	What is the highest sea state in which a ship of 
1,000t can be expected to carry out full combat 
support at a sea speed of 20 knots at least 75 percent 
of the time? See also McCreight and Stahl (1985)(4 t).
  Fig. 115 shows the Seakeeping Operating 
Envelopes for two ship functions in addition to the 
two shown in Fig. 112. Fig. 115(a) is for the at-sea-
replenishment function in Sea State Number 5 and 
Fig. 115(b)is for the helicopter launch and recovery 
function in Sea State Number 6. In preparing both 
figures the pre- scribed values of Criteria 8 and 10 of 
Table 20, Column 2 were considered. In addition, Fig. 
115 utilizes the values in Table 22 for Criteria 1, 2 
and 12:
  Trends of Operability Index with sea state number 
for the destroyer of Figs. 112 and 115 are shown for 
four ship functions in Fig. 116. In this figure the shape 
of the curves was approximated by following the 
trend of the 8,000-t optimum hull of Bales and 
Cieslowski (1981)shown in Fig. 114, replotted as a 
solid curve in Fig. 116.
  (d)	Seakeeping Performance Index SPI-1. The 
Mission Effectiveness Index, SPI-1, introduced in 
Sec- tion 7.1, is computed by summing the 01 
values for the ship function weighted by the 
probabilities, p. (ex- pected frequency of 
occurrence), of the sea state con- ditions in which 
that function is to be carried out. This will provide a 
value of SPI-l for the particular ship function 
considered. If the evaluation is to cover a number of 
ship functions, another factor, IR, must be included 
that represents the relative importance of that 
function. Equation (238) expresses this mathe- 
matically, and Table 23 is a sample calculation,

 

  The values of 01 as functions  of sea  state  utilized  
in Table 23 for the four ship functions of  Figs.  112 
and 115 were obtained from Fig. 116. Table 23 also 
incorporates the following two simplifying assump- 
tions:
  •	The same distribution of sea state severity (given 
in the 1st column) applies for all four ship functions.
  •	Use of all possible ship speeds and ship-wave 
head- ing angles is equally probable for each of the 
ship functions.
  If the first assumption is not valid, then  new  data 
for Column (1) of Table 23 must be estimated for each 
ship function and incorporated into the calculation. 
These data may be obtained from the information on 
sea state frequency of occurrence in the Northern 
Hemisphere (S. Bales, et aI1981). (See also Section 2.)












Table 21-Sample Computation of the Value of the Operability Index (01) for the Destroyer of fig. 112 Performing the Sonar Search 
Function in Sea State 6.
Ship Speeds


15-20 Knots

20-25 Knots

25-30 Knots

Calculation.,,.o..f Values of  0.1.
Column No.
1
2	3
4
5
6	7
8
9
,....10	11' 
                   p, (Esti-		p; (Esti-		p, (Esti•		Cols 3 + 6 + 9 
Ship-Wave Heading	mated	Cols. 1  X 2		mated	Cols. 4  X 5		mated	Cols. 5 X 6
Row   Angl¥i µ., deij (See	From	(Rows 1-12	From	µ.   (See	(Rows 1-12	From	µ.  (See	(Rows 1-12	Cols	01 Value For Var-
No.	·g. 113	Fig. 113)	g. 114b)	Only)	Fig. 113)	g. 114c)	Only)	Fig. 113)	g. 114c)	Only)	1+4+7	ious Headings	-t
1	345-15	1.00	.250	0.250	1.00	.0833	0.0833	1.00	.0833	0.0833	3.00	0.4167	0z


2	15-45	0.94	.100	0.094	1.00	.0833	0.0833	1.00	.0833	0.0833	2.94	0.2607
3	345-315	0.94	.100	0.094	1.00	.0833	0.0833	1.00	.0833	0.0833	2.94	0.2607



C/1


4	45-75	0.02	.025	0.000	0.15	.0833	0.0125	0.31	.0833	0.0258	0.48	0.0383
5	315-285	0.02	.025	0.001	0.15	.0833	0.0125	0.31	.0833	0.0258	0.48	0.0389
6	75-105	0.99	0	0	0.91	.0833	0.0758	0.72	.0833	0.0600	2.62	0.1358
7	285-255	0.99	0	0	0.91	.0833	0.0758	0.72	.0833	0.0600	2.62	0.1358	<
8	105-135	0.23	.025	0.006	0.18	.0833	0.0150	0.15	.0833	0.0125	0.56	0.0335	m
9	255-225	0.23	.025	0.005	0.18	.0833	0.0150	0.15	.0833	0.0125	0.56	0.0334	C/1
10	135-165	0	.100	0	0	.0833	0	0	.0833	0	0	0
11	225-195	0	.100	0	0	.0833	0	0	.0833	0	0	0
12	165-195	0	.250	0	0	.0833	0	0	.0833	0	0	0
Sums of Rows


13
14 p.


1 thru 
12	5.36	1.000	0.450	5.48	1.000	0.4566	5.36	1.000	0.4466	16.20	1.3534
Fif  
114a)	0.30	0.50	0.20


15	ow 1    X 14	0.1350	0.2283	.0893	0.4527
NOTES: Table is based on Equation (237) and the speed and heading distribution given in Fig. 114. Summation in row 15 gives 0.1.
01 Value Assuming Equal Probability of all Speeds and Headings: Row 13, Col 10 + 36* = 0.450
•	12 Bands of heading angles times 3 bands of speeds = 36.


 

in Table 20. These data must then be utilized in place 
of the data given in Columns (2), (5), (8) and (11) of
Table 23.
  As indicated in Section 7.1, SPI-1 has very important 
quantitative operational significance. Its value is the 
probability or expected fraction of total time that the 
operational mission for which the ship was designed 
can be performed while in its operating  area,  subject 
to the constraints imposed by the seaway on the per- 
formance of the ship and its systems. As previously 
noted, other performance limitations may be even more 
severe constraints, but the percent  of time  measured 
by SPI-1 can never be exceeded unless the ship is 
altered or unless that part of its operating doctrine 
determined by the prescribed values of the seaway 
performance criteria is changed. Hence, it is a unique 
quantitative measure of the operational utility  of  a 
ship and is ideally suited to assess the seakeeping 
performance of most ships not engaged in the routine 
transportation of goods or people.
  Calculated SPI-1 values for notational ships, capable 
of launching, recovering and supporting various types 
of naval aircraft are compared by Comstock, et al










Table 23-Sample Computation of SPl-1 for a Destroyer Performing Four Ship Functions
Row
No.	Ship Functions	1. Transit	2. Sonar Search	3.  At Sea Replenishment	4. Helicopter Operations
 	-			-		-	- -   
Col 3 X	Col 6 X	Col 9 X	Col 17 X
           Probabil-	Value		IR Value	Value		IR Value	Value		IR Value	Value		IR Value Col 4 + 7 
Sea State	ity of	of 0.1.	Col 1 X		From	of 0 .1.	Col 1 X		From	of 0 .1.	Col 1 X		From	of 0 .1.	Col 1 X		From	+ 10 +
Number	Sea State   Fig. 116	Col2	Row0	Fig. 116	Col 5	Row 0	Fig. 116	Col. 8	Row 0	Fig. 116	Col 11	Row0	13	0
-t
1	0-1	0	1.00	0	0	1.00	0	0	1.00	0	0	1.00	0	0	5
2	1-2	0.057	1.00	0.057	0.023	1.00	0.057	0.014	1.00	0.057	0.006	1.00	0.057	0.014
3	2-3	0.197	1.00	0.197	0.079	1.00	0.197	0.049	1.00	0.197	0.020	1.00	0.197	0.049	(/)
4	3-4	0.283	1.00	0.283	0.113	1.00	0.283	0.071	1.00	0.283	0.028	1.00	0.283	0.071
5	4-5	0.195	1.00	0.195	0.o78	1.00	0.195	0.049	0.78	0.152	0.o15	1.00	0.195	0.049


6	5-6	0.175	0.49	0.086	0.034	0.043	0.o75	0.019	0	0	0	0.27	0.047	0.012
7	6-7	0.076	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
8	7-8	0.017	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
9	>8	0.001	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
Sum of
10	Rows 1-9	1.00	0.818	0.327	0.807	0.202	0.689	0.069	0.779	0.195	.2:0.793 =SP! - 1
NOTES: Table is based on using Equation (238, Figs. 112, 115 and 116, and the two simplifying assumptions given in the text. 
Summation in Row 11 gives SPl-1 for Relative Importance IR given in Row 0.
SPl-1 Value for the Same Relative  Importance of  all Ship Functions  in Given  by Sum of  Values of  Cols. 3, 6, 9 & 12 of  Row 10 + 4	0.773


►
m
(/)


156	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



HEAD SEAS
1ao•


H
E
A
D
 
S
E
A
S





















NOS. 2, 4, 5, 8, 10WERE 
FOUND NOT TO IMPOSE 
NfYUMITS


o·
FOLLOWING SEAS


NOTE: CRITERIA
NOS. 4 AND 5 WERE 
FOUND NOT TO IMPOSE 
LIMITS


o
·
F
O
L
L
O
W
I
N
G
 
S
E
A
S



(a)	PERFORMING AT - SEA REPLENISHMENT IN SEA STATE 5	(b) ENGAGED IN HELICOPTER OPERATIONS IN SEA STATE 6
Fig. 115 Seakeeping Operating Envelopes (SOE) for other functions of the
destroyer  of  Fig. 113




REFERENCE CURVE FOR TI-IE "OPTIMUM" HULL 
OF BALES-CIESLOWSKI (1981 PERFORMING
1.01---  -1------t-----,--+---r-FULLCOMBAT SUPPORT. PRESCRIBED LIMITS:
ROLL-2.5° RMS.   PITCH. 1.s0  0  RMS.


'	' \


V
E
R
T
I
C
A
L
,
 
V
E
L
O
C
I
T
Y
 
•
 
1
m
i
s
 
R
M
S
.
 
S
O
N
A
R
 
E
M
E
R
G
E
N
C
 
e
s
·
•
 
2
4
/
H
R
.




AT - SEA REPLENISHMENT 
FUNCTION •
PRESCRIBED LIMffiNG	TRANSIT ALONE FUNCTION
0.6 VALUES: ROLL· 2.5° RMS·-----------+.-1-1-++--PRESCRIBED LIMITS:---1------t PITCH 
• 1•   RMS.	ROLL • 5• RMS.


0.1.


P
I
T
C
H
·
 
1
.
5
°
 
R
M
S
.
I
\	SONAR-SEARCH FUNCTION


0.41---------------------tt--tt--PRESCRIBED LIMITS:--+ 	1
ROLL•s· RMS.
PITCH· 1.5° RMS. 
EMERGENC-'.ES • 24/HR.
\	I	I
HELICOPTER LAUNCH AND
0.21--------------t----+--------RECOVERY FUNCTION ..
PRESC IBED LIMITS: ,•
\	ROLL_- 6.8° RMS,
PITCH· 1.35° RMS,
VERTICAL VELOCITY • 0.67 m/s RMS.
O'------'------'-----'--- ---- ----... 	.._ 	,
SEA STATE
Fig. 116  Approximate  trends  of  0.1.  01  o  function  of  seo stote for  four destroyer functions, bosed on Figs. 113 ond 116 (assuming equol probability 
of oll possible ship speeds ond wove heading angles)


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	157


(1980). The calculations are based on the same two speed reduction factors are discussed in Section 5, and, 
simplifying assumptions  stated  in connection with Ta-  if  necessary,  the  procedures  outlined  there  may  be 
ble 23. The Comstock work presents results for a used to estimate their value.
20,000-ton aircraft   carrier   of  SWATH configuration   As seen in Figs.  108 and  109 the  involuntary  speed 
and for monohull destroyers and aircraft carriers vary-  reductions  usually  apply  mainly in moderate,  not  se- 
ing in displacement  from 7000 to 95,000tons. The SPI-  vere,  seas. They, therefore,  often  have a smaller effect 
1 values show a significant degradation with  decreas-  on ship speed than  do the  voluntary  speed reductions.  
ing size for monohull ships  handling  vertical  takeoff  Hence the  value  of  SPI-2 is not very  sensitive  to the 
and landing aircraft from SPI-1 =  0.91 for  a  95,000-  values  of  the  involuntary  speed  reductions.  For  this 
ton aircraft carrier to 0.87 for  a  20,000-ton aircraft  reason,  only  the  calculation  of  the  voluntary  speed 
carrier  down to SPI-1  <  0.5 for a 7,000-ton destroyer.  reductions  is generally  carried  out  during  the  design 
In contrast,  the  study  shows  an  SPI-1 value  of  0.99  stage  of moderate  and high-speed ships. The situation 
for  a 20,000-ton SWATH aircraft  carrier.	may be different for large, full, slow-speed bulk car-
  7.8	The  Seakeeping  Performance  Index, SPI-2.   The	riers, where involuntary speed reductions govern. 
Transit  Speed Measure,  SPI-2 of Section 7.1, is appro-		Voluntary speed reductions can be calculated in the 
priate  for  assessing   the  overall seaway performance	design stage by the procedures of Sub-Section 7.7. As 
of the  vast  majority  of  ships  of the  world, i.e., those	in that section the first step is to construct SOE dia- 
engaged  in point-to-point transportation   of goods and	grams similar to Fig. 113 for the transit-alone function 
people.  As  noted  in  Section  7.2, SPI-2, unlike SPI-1,	in seas of progressively increasing severity. Figs. 
involves both  involuntary  and voluntary  speed reduc-	117(a)-(c) show such calculated SOE diagrams in sea 
tions. Thus, in addition to the performance  criteria and	states 5, 6 and 7 for a 4,000-t monohull whose  hull 
their  prescribed  values,  the  calculation  of SPI-2 may	form corresponds to the "optimum" seakeeping hull 
also  involve consideration  of  added resistance and re-	(Bales-Cieslowski, 1981).
duced available power in a seaway. These involuntary         Fig.  117d shows the  SOE diagram  for  a 4,OOO-mt o-




158	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



HEAD SEAS



HEAD SEAS





SLAM FREQ.
LIMIT (8)
VERTICAL
      ACCEL. 135°  LIMIT (4)
L

















o•		SHIP IS OPERABLE AT 
ALL SPEEDS ANO
FOLLOWING SEAS HEADINGS

(a)	"OPTIMUM" HULL IN SEA STATE 5



o·
FOLLOWING SEAS
(b)	"OPTIMUM" HULL IN SEA STATE 6



O.L=0.831






SLAM FREQ. 
LIMIT(8)


HEAD SEAS




VERTICA
L 
ACCEL. 
LIMIT 
(4)

    DECK 
WETNES
S LIMIT 
(10)


HEAD SEAS
















PITCH LIMIT
IS EXCEEDED AT ALL 
SPEEDS AND HEADINGS



o•
FOLLOWING SEAS



O.L=0



 
o·
FOLLOWING SEAS


O.L=0294


(c)"OPTIMUM" HULL IN S!"ASTATE 7	(d) "ANTI-OPTIMUM" HULL IN SEA STATE 6

Fig. 117 Seakeeping Operating Envelopes for a 4000-t monohull performing
a  pure  transit function




nohull in Sea State 6 with the "anti-optimum" form of 
the same reference. The allowable ship speeds up to 
a maximum speed of 25 knots taken from these figures 
are shown shaded in Fig. 118(a) for the "optimum" 
hull and in Fig. 118(b) for the "anti-optimum" hull.
  The basic features of the speed plots of Fig. 118 are 
not dissimilar from those of the larger commercial


ships of Fig. 109 with two exceptions:
  •	The degradation in allowable speed with 
increas­ ing sea state is much more abrupt in Fig. 
118 than in Fig. 109.
  •	In beam, quartering, and stern seas, Fig. 118(b) 
shows that speeds between zero and 4 to 18 knots are 
prohibited in Sea State 6 whereas higher speeds are


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	159


permissible.  Fig.  118 shows no such anomaly.	stage and for the purpose of selecting optimum hull 
The reason  for the  anomaly is evident in Fig. 117(d).	characteristics on the basis of expected superior per-
It shows that the prescribed values of 5 deg rms roll,  formance in the real seaway, the assumption  of a min-  
which has no effect on the optimum hull  (Fig.  117b),  imum-distance route  is appropriate.  With the  use  of a  
has  a big  effect on the  "anti-optimum"  hull, but  only   minimum-distance route,  the  value of SPI-2 expressed 
at  low speeds  and  at certain headings.	either  as  a ratio  of elapsed voyage  times or  expected
The  information  provided  by  Figs.  109 and  118 is	speed fraction is identical (Sub-Section 7.1).
only  one of three  essential  parts  of  the  data  needed     Table 25 shows  a sample  computation  of SPI-2 ex-   
to  calculate  SPI-2. The second part  of needed data  is    pressed   as  expected  speed  fraction   on  hypothetical  
a description of the kind of seas that a ship will ex- voyages of the two hulls  of  Fig.  118. The  following 
perience  as  a function  of time, location, and season  in  two  arbitrary  assumptions  concerning  the   voyages 
the oceans between its designated ports. As noted in were made in Table 25:
Section  7.7,  these  data   are  available  in  Bales, et  al		• Equal time is spent at each of the nine headings. 
(1981). See also Section 2.•			The probability distribution of sea state severity 
The third  part  of the  data  needed  to calculate SPI-	used in Table 24 (for all-season operation in the North-
2  is  the  route  the  ship  will follow between its ports.	ern Hemisphere) is applicable to these voyages. (For 
One such obvious route is the minimum distance route,	ships on scheduled liner services, the weather statistics 
which   in  calm  water   would  also   be the  minimum	for  the winter season-or	worst winter month-may 
elapsed time route.  However, because  of the powerful	be more appropriate).
impact of seaway-induced speed reductions on voyage • For  the  "anti-optimum"  hull,  the  low-speed  re- 
elapsed time, the  minimum  distance  route  is  seldom  strictions  in quartering  and  following seas  can be ig- 
the minimum elapsed time route. It is for this reason nored.
that weather routing, where the objective of achieving The 11.8 to 17.1 percent reduction in average  sea 
minimum voyage elapsed  time  determines  the  route,  speed from the smooth water  speed of 25 knots shown 
has become so commonplace for ships. With weather in Table 24 illustrates the crucial impact that seaway 
routing, the actual route that the ship will follow is performance can have on the economic viability of a time-
dependent on the information available from  commercial ship. Similar computations  for the Victory weather 
forecasts made during the voyage. Hence, ship of Fig. 109 indicate a 16.5 percent reduction  to calculation of SPI-
2 can only be made ex-post-facto, an  average  sea  speed  of  14.6 knots  from  a  smooth unless an on-board 
computer is installed. However, for water speed of 17.5 knots.
the purposes of making reliable estimates of the eco-  The importance of the methodology presented  in this 
nomic viability of a proposed ship during its design section is that it can forecast the magnitude of the





160	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


speed reduction before a ship is built. As shown in  Hence,  its  magnitude  can  change  significantly  from  
Table 25, this speed reduction may be a strong  function  ship to  ship  of identical displacements.  Furthermore, 
of hull shape, for the "anti-optimum" hull form  of  the  magnitude  of the  speed reduction  must  be known 
Bales, Cieslowski (1981)has an average speed loss that   before  realistic  estimates  of the economic viability of 
is 1.6 knots or 6.4 percent greater than that of the a proposed ship can be made. For these reasons  it  is 
"optimum" hull. It is also shown in Section 8 that speed important that the calculation of SPI-2 should become 
reduction is a strong function of ship proportions. routine in the design stage of all transportation ships.


Section 8
Design  Aspects 14
  8.1 Introduction. Sections 2 to 5 have  presented  ered,  including  comparative  evaluation  of  the  sea- 
procedures  whereby  predictions  can  be  made  of  all  keeping  performance  of  alternative  designs  and 
aspects  of the  seakeeping  performance  of ships, both  selection of an optimum on the  basis  of economic con- 
in idealized regular waves and in the irregular patterns siderations.
actually  experienced at  sea. Such predictions cover not			8.2	Factors    aHecting	pitching	and   heaving.	(a) 
only motion responses  in six degrees  of  freedom, but		Theoretical   considerations.	Theory, supported by 
derived responses,  such as vertical  accelerations, ship-		model tests and full-scale observations, provides some 
ping  of  water,  slamming,  added power requirements		good general guidance to the designer.  First may be 
and wave-induced loads. Section 6 discussed the effects		mentioned the dimensional effect of ship size (partic- of 
various  motion-control devices. Finally, the preced-		ularly length) in relation to sea conditions encountered. 
ing Section 7 dealt  in detail with criteria of seakeeping		Sellars (1983) has pointed out that in general, for con- 
performance   that  define acceptable  limits  of ship re-		ventional mono-hulls in head seas, the longer the ship 
sponse  for   specific  ship  missions  or functions.  Fur-		the less the average wave excitation. This is mainly 
thermore,	it	showed	that	comparing	predicted		because the probability of encountering waves of near 
performance  over  a range  of expected sea conditions,		ship length decreases with increasing length, but also 
ship speeds  and headings  with the appropriate criteria		because the average height of long waves, and hence 
permits  the  evaluation  of  seakeeping performance  of		wave slope,  is  less  than  short  waves. Sellars  (1983) 
a  new design  in terms  of a Seakeeping  Performance		has calculated the probabilities of encountering con- 
Index  (SP!).						ditions leading to large  heave  and  pitch excitation in 
It  is the  object of this  section first  to draw upon the	average North Atlantic weather as a function of ship 
earlier  sections  to offer guidelines  that  will assist the		length, as shown in Fig. 119. See also Fig. 74 and
designer  in selecting  ship  characteristics favorable to	discussion in Section 4.7.
good  seakeeping  behavior.  Theory  shows (Section 3)		The advantage of greater  length  applies  whether 
that  the  effects  of  longitudinal  motions (pitch, heave	overall size, as indicated by displacement, remains the 
and  surge)  and  of  transverse   motions (roll, yaw and	same or increases with length. The favorable effect of 
sway)  can,  for  practical  purposes,  be considered sep-	increasing all dimensions together is discussed in Sec- 
arately.  This  will be done  here,  since design features	tion 4.7, where the non-dimensional plots  in Figs.  74 
to  reduce  motions are  generally  different  for the two	and 75 show clearly the comparative pitching and heav- 
cases.   The  longitudinal   motions (particularly  heave	ing motions of two geometrically similar ships in ir- 
and  pitch)  will be  considered  first,  since they are af-	regular head seas. However, this is an extreme case 
fected   more   by  choice  of  ship   dimensions, have  a	of a large size difference (ratio of 8 in displacements), 
greater   effect on attainable  speeds  in rough seas, and	while even a modest increase in size would be an ex- 
are  less  amenable  to  artificial  control. Attention  will	pensive way to improve seakeeping qualities. The ef- 
then  be  given to other  design  considerations, such as	fects of increasing length with displacement fixed are 
above-water  hull form  and  added power in waves, fol-	of greater interest and will be discussed further in this 
lowed by the  effects of transverse   motions  (rolling in	section.
particular)  and discussion of special considerations af-			It has been suggested in Section 4.9 that the next 
fecting  high-performance  ships.		consideration is whether the ship is expected to reduce 
Finally,  suitable  design  procedures   will be consid-	speed in order to operate in sub-critical conditions in
rough seas or can remain in a high-speed supercritical 
state. The first case applies to the majority of normal 
commercial and naval  vessels,  while the  latter  case is
14   Section  8 written   by Edward   V. Lewis,  assisted   by Philip Mandel,	characteristic  of  some  of  the  high-performance craft
particularly     with   sub-section  8.5, High-performance	Ships.	to be considered separately.


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	161




1 ,--------,----,-------.-------,----,0

L, SHIP LENGTH, FT

Fig. 119 Probability of conditions for large pitch and heave excitation, i.e., 
probability ILw 0.75 LI {Sellars, 1983)


  The problem of attaining sub-critical pitching and 
heaving behavior of normal ships over as wide a range 
of speed as possible requires consideration at early 
stages of design of the relationship of length-the 
most important dimension-and other hull character­ 
istics to the natural periods of oscillation, as discussed 
in Section 4.9. This important influence of natural pe­ 
riods of oscillation on motions in waves is often over­ 
looked because of the difficulty in determining natural 
periods experimentally. A solution tQ the problem is 
to plot model test (or calculated) responses on a basis 
of ship speed or encounter frequency, with wave 
length constant. The resulting peaks will define an 
effective natural frequency that is of prime interest.
  Fig. 120 is a plot of experimental model data (Stefun, 
1958) that illustrates the complex relationships exist­ 
ing between non-dimensional ship motion amplitudes 
and both wavelength-to-ship length ratio, LwiL, and 
tuning factor. A= w.l w,., where"'• "'•s• the frequency 
of encounter, varies with both wavelength and ship



  Fig. 121 also shows how, with speed constant, the ship 
response can be separated into a static value­ dependent on 
ship-wave geometry-and a magnifica­ tion effect 
depending mainly on tuning factor.
  Another effect of tuning factor is on phase relations. 
Szebehely (1955) showed that in waves around ship length the 
incidence of shipping water over the bow  and bow emergence 
leading to slamming are both as­ sociated with synchronous 
response; bow down into crest, bow up into hollow, with high 
relative vertical velocity (Lewis, 1955).
  Fig. 79 defines in a general way the conditions for critical 
operation in head seas, which generally give the worst 
pitching and heaving behavior. It is clear from  the  figure  
that  the  lower  the   period   ratio, T (g! L f 2 , the higher the 
speed before critical condi­ tions are reached. Hence, the 
period ratios for pitching and heaving have a vital effect on 
ship behavior and on attainable sea speed. The natural periods 
of pitching and heaving are usually quite close together, but 
at­ tention is focused here on the pitching period, T,.5, since it 
has the greater effect on wetness, slamming, and vertical 
accelerations. The influence of ship propor­ tions and form on 
T (g IL) 112 was discussed in Section
4.9 and general trends shown in Fig. 81.

1.6,----------,----------.....
1.4

1.2

1.0

J 0.8

1(\10.6

04

0,2
o- _.    .... 	.	... 	.	... 	,	...... 	._   _. 	,...._..J


speed (w,. is the natural frequency of  pitch or heave.)  
It can be seen that only the curves plotted for constant 
values of LwlL (solid lines) have clearly defined max­ 
ima, because"'• and hence A here depend only on model 
speed. Higher speeds would be required to define the 
maxima for longer waves (LwiL 1.25) (Fig. 57). The 
maxima are shown  to occur in this case at  a  A-value 
of about 1.1 rather than 1.0 because of approximations 
made (Section 3.7).
  The dashed curves in Fig. 120 drawn for constant 
Froude Number and varying Lwl L do not show distinct 
peaks because wavelength has a greater  direct  affect 
on excitation than indirect affect through changing"'•· 
All non-dimensional responses go to 1.0 in very long 
(infinite) waves in which the ship simply follows the 
wave contour, as shown by a replot of the data in Fig. 
121.


l.6r-----------,-.--------...








04	0.6	0.8	1.0	1.2	1.4	1.6
TUNING FACT0ll,A • GJ«/e.J,,
Fig. 120 Pitching and heaving amplitudes far a Series 60, 0.60 block model in head 
seas (Stefun, 1958)


162	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 	 




dictated by calm-water considerations rather than by 
rough-water performance. It may be that  in  many 
cases seakeeping considerations will encourage this 
trend.
  (b)	Damping. It is normally impossible or uneco- 
nomical to design ships for operation in the favorable 
speed zone only, and therefore an  important  problem 
is how to improve ship performance in the critical re- 
gion of Fig. 123. In this zone, the problem of reducing 
motions and thereby permitting higher speeds is pre- 
dominantly one of minimizing near-synchronous re-



sponses, which means increased damping and hence 
reduced magnification factor. An increase of damping 
is effective in an irregular sea in which synchronism 
with component waves occurs, just as it is under con- 
ditions of synchronism with regular waves.
  Some of the trends of proportions and form that are 
beneficial to reducing natural periods of pitch and 
heave are also favorable  to  increased  damping; such 
as reduced GM and coefficients of other sections, in- 
creased Gwp (hence more V-form and reduced Gvp) and 
filling the waterlines toward the ends. Work of Grim


164	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



(1959) and Porter (1960) show a distinct increase in 
damping with increasing BIT, although it may not 
always be favorable for reduced natural preriods. But 
since the effect of beam increase is felt mostly near 
midship, this factor may be less important for pitching 
than filling out the waterplane of the ends (increase 
in Cwp).
  Various writers agree on the importance of increas­ 
ing Cwp, which can also be expressed as a decreasing 
Cvp, especially for high-speed ships (Lewis, 1955) 
(Blok and Buekelmann, 1984). Bales (1980) found that 
the increase of CwP or decrease in CPV using V-sections 
was more effective in the forebody than in the aftbody. 
However, V-form forward may exact a penalty  in 
added resistance in calm water and/or waves.
  There is also evidence of the advantage of a wide 
longitudinal separation of LCF and LCB. (However, 
supercritical ships such as SWATHs show a strong 
disadvantage to such separation). With LCF 5.5 per­ 
cent L abaft the LCB, Moor (1970) showed a significant 
reduction in pitch and heave motions, vertical accel­ 
eration forward, relative bow motion, and speed loss 
in waves for a series of models of a 770-ft. (250-m), 
26-knot passenger ship. However, trial speed was re­ 
duced by 3 percent. Naval vessels with wide transom 
sterns have been able to take advantage of this fa­ 
vorable effect of LCF and LCB separation. Finally 
there is the possibility of using fixed fins for damping 
of pitch (Section 6).
  Of course, some of the factors that increase damping 
will also increase the excitation. However, under con­ 
ditions of severe synchronous responses the damping
effect is always at its greatest and hence would be 
expected to predominate.
  

(c)	Model test results. Before adopting guidelines 
derived from simplified theoretical period relation­ 
ships, some confirmation is needed and the best 
method for that purpose is model tests in waves. 
Unfortu­ nately, comparative model experiments that 
isolate the effects of specific changes in hull 
proportions and form are rare. For example, the 
extensive tests of Series 60 hulls in regular waves 
(Vossers, et al 1960), which reveal trends of motions 
and power  with  LIT,  LIB and CB, include 
inadvertent effects of changes in dis­ placement, L / 7 
113 and BIT as well, and do not com­ pare performance 
under realistic irregular sea conditions.
  However, Ha.mlin and Compton (1966) made use 
of Vossers' model data to show the results of 
calculations on Series 60 models of different LIT (and  
L / 7 113 ratios in a severe irregular sea. Fig. 124 
confirms the advantage of a large LIT value for 
minimum relative
bow motion, sIL. Calculations of heave acceleration
show a similar advantage. Furthermore, if bow free­ 
board is proportional to length, the shipping of water 
should decrease with increasing LIT. The situation 
regarding slamming is somewhat different. Here the 
more slender ship shows up poorly, because even 
though the relative bow  motion  in  relation  to length 
is less, the reduced draft would result in more 
frequent bow emergence and higher relative velocities 
(Vossers, et al 1960). It should be noted that the 
model data on which these conclusions were based 
assumed constant LIB values, which could lead to 
excessive  beam, from a stability viewpoint, in the 
longest ship.
  Subsequent studies have used the same or similar 
data to calculate and compare  the predicted  behavior 
of ships of equal displacement in irregular head seas,



1.2..--------....----------.----------,----------,
ZONE  OF.SEVERE 
PITCHING ANO WET DECKS

















0
   

0&/
Fig. 123 Trends of ottoinoble speed in different seo conditions, from logbook analysis compared with theoretical trends (Aertssen, 1958-59)


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	165


including the effects of variation in forebody shape, 
longitudinal radius of gyration, etc. (Swaan, 1961) 
(Swaan and Vossers, 1961) (Swaan and Rijken, 1964) 
(Ewing, 1967). St. Denis (1983) has reviewed much of 
this work and has drawn some general  conclusions. 
The research confirms that, for moderate to high-speed
ships, there are advantages to be gained in pitch and 
heave-and  related responses-by  increasing  LIT and




0.15 ------ ----------




x-
i


BIT, reducing Ca while increasing CwP (more V-shaped	0 05  	
sections) and reducing longitudinal radius of gyration. 
It also shows that for low-speed ships (Fn < 0.3) some 
of the above, such as the advantage of high LIT or a


X
SERIES 60 HEAD SEAS
C8• 0.70	LIB • 7.0
·. · 20,400 TONS
FBD al BOW
V• 11.28 LENGTH •0.09


CL--- ---...._-- ----'-------'


low Ca, may not apply, especially for large tankers
where powering is more of a problem than motions in 
waves.
A recent model investigation  by Schmitke and Mur­
dey (1980) and later extended by  Murdey  and  Simoes 
Re (1985) is  based  on a  well-chosen  range of  hull char­


8


Fig. 124


12	16	20	24	28
LIT

Relative bow motion trends with L/T ratio in irregular head seas,
500-ft. ships (Ha1111in and Compton, 1965)


acteristics and again evaluates the models by compar­ 
ing their predicted behavior at constant displacement 
in a typical long-crested head sea. Although these re­ 
sults apply specifically to fine frigate/destroyer hull 
forms (Fig. 125) they are believed to provide useful 
guidance for other relatively high-speed displacement 
craft. These studies employed the slenderness param­ 
eter £2/BT, which indicates length (squared) relative 
to the area, BT, of the midship circumscribing rectan­ 
gle. Further definition of proportions is given by the 
ratio BIT, and hull form by Ca and CwP·
  Results showing trends with all  these  parameters 
are given in Figs. 126-129 for pairs of models at a 
constant displacement of 3500 t. In evaluating these 
results it is important to note that L2IBT and BIT are 
not  independent  parameters,  since  they  both involve
B. However,  the  product of  L2    BT and  BIT is (LITl,


reducing BT. Furthermore, since L2 I BT is equal to 
CaL31V and Ca is held constant, Fig. 127 also 
implies the same favorable trend with  increasing  
L3IV,  or LIV 118, the length-displacement ratio 
(Froude's @), as previously suggested (Section 4.9) on 
the basis of pe­ riod considerations.
  However, predicted relative bow motion 
(RBM) shows little change-or even a reverse 
trend-with increasing  L2 I BT.  This  picture  
changes  if  the   non­
dimensional  ratio  sIL  is  used  as  an  index  of RBM
instead of s. (See Fig. 126, where slL reduces signif­ 
icantly with increasing LIT). If the RBM data  in  Fig. 
127 are replotted in terms of sIL it will be found that
there is a distinct reduction in response with 
increasing L 2 I BT in all cases. The question in any 
specific situ­ ation, such as evaluation of probabilities 
of shipping
water  or slamming  is, which  is a  more suitable index


and TIL is an independent parameter that has been 
shown to be important in studying natural periods of 
pitch and heave (Equation 204d, Section 4.9.) Similarly 
the ratio Cal CwP = CvP may be more significant than 
the two coefficients considered separately.
  The comparative findings in Figs. 126-129 are based 
on self-propelled experiments on 10 models in regular 
head waves (with wavelengths varied in about 20 steps 
from L/2 to 3L; heights 1/ 50 Lw) at each of four speeds
corresponding  to  Fn  =  0.2,  0.3, 0.4, and  0.5. Faired
results were used as RAOs to calculate significant 
responses in irregular head seas, using the "quadratic 
regression spectrum" (Gospodnetic and Miles, 1974) 
for a significant height of 3.66m (12 ft). Response data 
were averaged over a wave modal period range of 7.28 
to 10.92 sec and over a speed range of 15 to 30 knots. 
They have been made non-dimensional by dividing by 
the appropriate response value for  the  basic  hull  of 
the series (No. 6).
  First, it may be seen in Fig. 127 that with displace­ 
ment constant there is in all cases a distinct reduction  
in pitch and heave amplitudes, and in vertical accel­ 
eration at 0.25L from the bow, as L 2 I BT increases. 
This shows the clear value of increasing length and


of performance, s or  sIL?  In the case of  wet  decks, 
it is often feasible to increase bow freeboard in pro­ 
portion to increasing length by simply extending the
sheer  curve  forward.  This  would  mean  that  sIL  is
appropriate.  On the  other hand, an  increase in ship
length may entail a reduction in draft forward, which 
would suggest that the absolute value, s,is significant 
for  consideration  of  bow  emergence  and 
slamming.
Such reduction in draft with increasing L 2 I BT would 
be expected to increase the probability of bow emerg­ 
ence and slamming, as previously noted. This is not 
always true, however. Bales (1980) found that "bot­ 
tom slamming per se may be reduced or stabilized by 
reductions in relative motion  attendant  to reductions 
in TIL."
  Fig. 127 (as well as Fig. 126) shows a clear 
advantage of increasing BIT. This is consistent with 
the conclu­ sion in sub-section 8.2(b) that increases in 
BIT are favorable for reduced pitching and  heaving,  
because of increased damping. Furthermore, since 
increasing both L2I BT and BIT is shown to be 
beneficial, increas­ ing their product (LI T)2  should 
also be beneficial. This is as predicted on the basis of 
favorable natural periods alone in Equations (204d) 
and (206), Section 4.9.


166	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

bow motion. The more complete data on C8 (Fig. 131) 
also show some ambiguity.  Supplementary  analyses 
by Simoes Re (1986) have shown that, using data from 
the extended series, the relationship between L2 I BT 
and C8 is clarified. He found that for pitch and bow 
acceleration, with displacement fixed, there are:
  •	Decreased  responses when C8    decreases and L 2 I 
BT increases
•	Increased responses when both C8 and L 2 BT








 

fig. 125 Body plans of two frigate models tested by Schmitke and Murdey 
(1980); Design 6 is the basic model


  Figs. 128 and 129 show gains in increasing Cwp and 
decreasing C8 , hence reducing CvP = C8 / CwP• How­ 
ever, the situation regarding relative bow motion  in 
Fig. 129 is again ambiguous. Hence, an obvious con­ 
clusion is that special attention in design for good 
seakeeping should be given to obtaining adequate free­ 
board forward and adopting section shapes that reduce 
slamming probabilities.
  Results of the extension of this model series  to a 
total of 31 models were reported by Murdey and Sim­ 
oes Re (1985), and some are shown in Figs. 130 and
131. Although data are presented in a similar  manner 
as before, an I'ITC spectrum with 4.0-m (13-ft.) sig­ 
nificant height was used as a basis for predictions. The 
range of zero-crossing period for averaging responses 
was 6.1-9.1 sec, and ship speeds of 13-33 knots.
  Fig. 130 shows similar trends with L 2/ BT as  Fig. 
126, but over a much wider range, with displacement 
again constant (Curves added for constant length  are  
of less interest).
  The extended series also confirms with  more data 
the trends of Figs. 127 and 128 and 129 that increasing 
BIT   and  CwP, and  decreasing  C8   ,    are  favorable  to 
reduced pitching and heaving. However, there is some 
ambiguity in the case of CwP with respect to relative


decrease
  •	Uncertain effect when L 2 I BT stays constant. 
Hence, a clear conclusion emerges that using 
reduced C8 to increase length is advantageous but 
using it otherwise of doubtful value. Trends of 
relative bow motion with C8 in the expanded study 
remained am­ biguous.
  Some supplementary tests with different 
combina­ tions of bows and sterns of two models 
(C8 = 0.48) showed a clear advantage for all responses 
in increased V-ness of the bow, with or without a 
wide transom. At the same time, a wide transom 
showed an advan­
tage in pitch and bow acceleration over a narrow-tran­ 
som stern, while showing only slight improvement in 
heave and relative bow motion.
  (d)	Specific guidelines for  design.  We are  now  in 
a position to state a number of specific conclusions on 
the basis of both experimental studies and the theo­ 
retical relationships considered in Section 4, 
Equations
(204)	and (206), to reduce the period ratios and in­ 
crease damping. These apply to moderate to high-
speed ships intended to operate in the critical and sub-
critical speed zones, and should lead to reduced 
pitching and heaving motions:
  •	Ship proportions-Increase length relative to 
draft T, or BT, which generally implies increased
•	Increase BIT for greater damping (if feasible).
  •	Coefficients of form-Reduce CvP (more V-form, 
especially in forebody) with reduced C8 and increased 
CwP• Decrease  C8    by increasing length. (If  length  
is decreased, effect is generally doubtful).
  To reduce pitching, and hence relative bow motion, 
but not heaving:
  •	Longitudinal distribution of W.P.-Increase the 
coefficient of waterplane inertia, CA (filling WL's at 
ends). (Increase transom width in naval vessels).
  •	Longitudinal mass distribution-Reduce the coef­ 
ficent of mass moment of inertia, C/.
  The above are also generally favorable to reduced 
vertical accelerations, and usually, but not always, 
to relative bow motion. This means that separate 
consid­ eration must be given to ensuring adequate 
freeboard forward to avoid excessive wetness and 
bow section shapes to minimize slamming.
  Note that the effects of changes in coefficients of 
added mass (heave, A'33) and added inertia (pitch, A' 
55) are assumed to be negligible.
  It can be seen that one of the important parameters 
affecting pitching motion is longitudinal mass radius


MOTIONS  IN  WAVES	167



of gyration. Although this is not often under the con­ 
trol of the designer, there are exceptions, and  there­ 
fore this factor should not be overlooked. For example, 
locating machinery space amidships results in cargo 
being located closer to the ends than with (compara­ 
tively light) machinery way aft, with a correspondingly 
long gyradius. In ships carrying high-density cargo all 
available cargo volume may not be needed, and there­ 
fore arrangements to concentrate cargo closer to mid­ 
ship may be feasible. This will reduce radius of 
gyration, shorten the natural pitching period and per­ 
mit somewhat higher subcritical speed  in  irregular 
head seas. However, an increased midship sagging 
moment, both static and wave-induced, will result (Dal­ 
zell, 1964).
  8.3 Other Design Considerations. (a)Above-water 
form. An important criterion of seakeeping perform­ 
ance discussed in Section 7 is frequency of deck wet­ 
ness forward. It has been shown in  sub-section  8.2 
that, if the ratio between relative bow motion and
length, sIL, is considered, the same trends of hull
characteristics that favor reduced pitch and heave ap­ 
ply. But shipping water depends not only on the rel-



ative bow motion but on the above-water form and 
section shapes. Therefore, every effort must be 
made to ensure not only that the freeboard ratio, 
FIL, se­ lected is adequate, but that bow section 
shapes are suitable.
  It was shown in section 5.3 that calculations of rel­ 
ative bow motion can be used to predict trends of 
required freeboard in relation to ship length on  the 
basis of probabilities of shipping water (see Fig. 85). 
Bales (1979) has carried this approach even further.
  In Section 5.3 the non-linear factors that influence 
the true relative bow motion are  also  discussed  and 
the difficulties of calculation explained. It is there rec­ 
ommended that, if possible, model tests in irregular 
waves be used for a final determination  of freeboard­ 
as well as of the amount and shape of flared sections, 
use of knuckles, etc. General guidance derived from 
model tests is given by Newton (1960) for cargo 
ships, Moor and Luyster (1960) for tankers, and Van 
Sluijs and Tan (1972) for frigates.
  Some empirical guidance regarding suitable bow 
freeboard is given in Fig. 132, showing freeboard/ 
length ratios for a number of ships, as well as 
trends




PITCH	HEAVE



RBM


i -ACCEL.' (o. sL)
L2/ BT     8/T	Cw,




Q
a:
w
(z/)
wa:





 I.
I 
1.
0 
>-


!
>
«
-
<
 
:
 
,
,


1
.
3
1
r
:
:
f
l
3 
1.
0


-
-
-
/


-	238	328    0.74
-    
-    
2
3
8	3.28    0.80
-
/
-
­




0.9


"':
\


'-,i


·	L
.
,
,
-
,
	/


0.8	I	I	I
150	238	150	238	150	238	150	238
L1/ BT


0.8
0.48	0.52   048	0.52 0.48
Ca


0.52   0,48	0.52


Fig. 126 Effect of L/BT on seakeeping


Fig. 128 Effect of C, on seakeeping





HEAVE     IRSM



I
I  -ACCEL \o.2ik.1



1.3
>


1
.
3

o
 
1
.
2


Q 1.2
a:
I.I

f3 1.0
a:


a
:
l
z
l
l
 
'
·
'
e
n
 
1
.
0
a
w
:



0.9

0.8 3.28





42 3.28





42	3.28
BIT





4.2





3.28





4.2


0.9

0 8
·




0.74






I
0.80  0.74	0.80   0.74	0.80  0.74	0.80
C
w
P
F
i
g
.
 
1
2
9
 
E
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
C
w
,
 
s
e
a
k
e
e
p
i
n
g
,
 
I
!
.
 
=
 
3
5
0
0
t


Fig.  127     Effect  of  BIT on seakeeping	all from Schmitke and Murdey (1980)


 



obtained from the various sources indicated. In  the 
case of large passenger liners it is generally considered 
that the bow freeboard of the Europa was inadequate, 
the America somewhat borderline, and the United 
States satisfactory. The left-hand part of the  figure 
must be considered only as a general guide, however, 
since it has been shown in Section 5 that required bow 
freeboard depends greatly  on the  speed  of  the  ship, 
as shown in the right-hand part of the  figure, as  well 
as above-water form.
  U.S. Navy procedures for determining minimum 
freeboard for various types  of naval  vessels  is given 
in a Design Data Sheet (NAVSEA, 1982). Recommen- 
dations regarding other above-water hull design pa- 
rameters:
  "A sufficient amount of flare is helpful in 
deflecting water outward as the bow moves 
downward into a wave to decrease the occur- 
rences of deck wetness and to increase effective 
freeboard. However, extreme flare may inten- 
sify slamming impact and may also cause 
greater speed loss than would be necessary to 
limit wetness.  Ships  with  superior  wetness 
have flare angles between 20 and 25 deg.
  

"A knuckle is often used in combination withflare 
on ships in which there is a require- ment to maintain 
arrangeable deck area for- ward and which would 
result  in excessiveflare if   the  flare	were  carried
	to the weather deck.....
"Spray rails provide a simple way of re-
ducing deck wetness on designs in which wind driven 
spray is brought on deck or  whipped into the bridge. 
Spray rails are fitted forward below the edge of the 
weather deck. It  should be pointed out that once the 
ship ~ motions become so severe that the rails are 
submerged, the increase in effective freeboard is lost.
  "Sheer is increased forward in order to pro- vide 
the required freeboard. If  excessive sheer is required, 
then a bulwark  may  be indicated or a raised fo 'c'sle 
added.....
  "Breakwaters are important to above-water hull 
design because they protect deck equip- ment once 
green water has been shipped on deck. The breakwater 
is vee-shaped and is 10- catedforward  oftheforward-
mostgun  or mis- sile launcher on the weather deck ..... 
"


MOTIONS IN WAVES	169


  (b)	Slam avoidance. Another important criterion of	therefore steps taken to reduce these motions will be 
seakeeping  performance   discussed  in Section 7 is the	advantageous for resistance. Fortunately, for high- 
probability of slamming.  Calculated  relative  bow mo-  speed ships the trend toward  increased L/7118  dictated 
tion is a good basis  for  determining  the probability of	by seakeeping considerations should have a favorable 
bow  emergence.  However,  the  occurrence of bottom	effect on calm water resistance and power. This has 
slamming   depends   also  on  other   factors: hull form	been confirmed by calculations and model tests, such 
(particularly   shape  of  bottom  sections forward)  and	as those reported by Schmitke and Murdey (1980), also 
relative  vertical  velocity at impact locations. V-shaped	(Bales and Day, 1982). Propulsive efficiency for all 
sections   and  minimum  flat  of  bottom are  desirable.	types of ships is also adversely affected by pitching 
These  effects  are  discussed  in  Section  5,  where it is	and heaving motion. Hence, reduction in motions 
shown that  available  methods  of predicting slamming	should be generally favorable to low loss of propulsive 
probabilities   by  calculation   must   be considered  ap-	efficiency. Trends toward reduced draft at the stern 
proximate   for   design   use.   Flare-entry slamming  is	can lead to more frequent propeller emergence, or to 
even more difficult to calculate.	restrictions on propeller diameter, either of which may
For  merchant   ships  and  tankers   that may operate	have an unfavorable effect.
over a wide range of drafts, the light-load or ballast The situation  may be quite different for full bodied,  
condition is  critical.  Adequate  ballast  water  capacity  low-speed ships where  energy  losses  in the  reflection 
to keep the forward draft reasonably large is essential. of on-coming waves may be a more important factor
  To determine  the  acceptability  of  a new design the	in resistance than motions and may call for U rather 
designer  also has recourse  to the slamming experience	than V-form  sections  forward  (finer  waterline  end- 
of other  similar ships. For unusual  designs model tests	ings). In such cases there  may be a trade-off between 
in irregular   waves  are  undoubtedly  the most reliable	damping of motions and added resistance in waves. 
method  to  use for evaluation.	Furthermore, if motions are less of a problem at low
  (c)	Added  power  requirements.   Because of today's	speeds, a shorter hull length may be  advantageous, 
high  cost of fuel the  search  for good seakeeping qual-	and economic trade-off studies are called for as dis- 
ities must include consideration of the effects of op- cussed as Sub-section 8.6.
timum choice  of  ship  proportions  on  power  Bulbous bows are often used to reduce wave-making 
requirements, under both calm sea and rough water resistance of high-speed ships and to improve  llow 
conditions. As pointed out in Section 5, both added conditions of low-speed, full-form ships (Chapter V). 
resistance and reduced propulsive  efficiency enter  in.  The question  arises  as to their  effects on seakeeping  
The biggest factor in added resistance for high-speed performance.  In  general,  model tests  in waves  show  
ships is the effect of severe pitching and heaving, and little effect of bulbs on motions, but an increased prob-


170	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


ability of slamming in severe seas,  especially  with  may also have the  more unfavorable  effect of increas-  
lar~er bulbs. High-speed ships in waves shorter than ing the roll natural frequency.
theIr lengths  may  show  somewhat  less  added  resist-  Since resonance effects are very important in rolling, 
ance when fitted with moderate-sized bulbs (Dillon and it would be desirable to design for a natural  period 
Lewis, 1955). But this is not always the case, and if that avoids resonance entirely. This is seldom possible 
slamming occurs it will, of course, limit the attainable because of the wide range  of wavelengths  to which a 
rough water speed (Wahab, 1966). It seems best  to  ship will respond in beam or quartering  seas. However,  
adopt a bulbous bow only for reasons of calm water it is fortunate that roll amplitudes are asymptotic to
~esistance, after  making  sure  that  any adverse effects		maximum wave slope in long waves (low frequencies), 
In rough  water  are acceptable.		and therefore, except in the vicinity of resonance, the 
Bow sonar  domes may be a problem with naval ves-	response will tend to the ideal situation-Le., following 
sels.  Since  they  are   relatively   "soft"  structures,   in		the wave slope. Fig. 133 shows typical rolling response 
order  to  transmit  sound,  they  can be easily damaged		of a cargo ship to the angular  components  of  both a 
by  slamming.  Usually  they  are  located deeper in the		mild and a rough short-crested beam seaway. Since 
water  than  conventional  bulbous  bows and therefore		this figure is in the log-slope format, the longer waves 
may have  less  effect on motions.		and lower frequencies are to the right. It is clear that
  8.4  Factors  Affecting  Rolling.  Considering  the   moving the  roll RAG to  the  right  (lower  natural  fre- 
transverse motions (roll, yaw and sway), roll is of quency) would lead  to  a  reduction  in  roll  response, 
particular interest for conventional ships because it even to  attainment  of  a  supercritical  condition as  de- 
makes the largest contribution to the objectionable fined in Section 4. Furthermore, as the natural fre- 
accelerations. For most ships the  magnitude  and  fre-  quency  is  reduced  (natural  period  increased)  the 
quency  range  of these  accelerations  happen  to  corre-    resulting  accelerations,  with  constant  roll amplitude,
spond to those of maximum human sensitivity and thus	would  reduce  as  Cl)n  2•      A long  natural   period  also re-
are very likely to produce motion sickness  in  rough  duces the likelihood of synchronous  rolling, as a study  
seas. However, in the design of high-performance craft of Fig. 134 (based on Fig. 78) will show. For any given 
the resulting unique hull forms often have motion range of wavelengths, the longer the natural period 
characteristics  such  that  some  other  motion  (say,  the  narrower  the  range  of  directions  and  speeds  at 
pitch) is more likely to produce sickness. For conven- which synchronism will occur.
tional  ships,  although  roll is the  most noticeable com-		With this approach, as noted in Section 7.6 (Fig. 110), 
ponent   of  transverse    motions,  yaw  and sway  (also	the longest practicable natural roll period of ships is 
heave),  contribute  to the  accelerations experienced by	favorable as far as reducing seasickness (MSI) is con- 
personnel  and equipment.  Hence, as noted previously,	cerned. Ships with low natural frequency are  usually 
the  apparent   vertical  reference  is  actually normal to	known as easy rollers, while ships  with  high  natural 
the  wave  surface   in  relatively  long  beam seas.  The	frequency are stiff and usually experience abrupt and 
ideal for  comfort  is  for  the  ship to  follow  the wave	unpleasant rolling. An example was the liner Maiolo 
slope, i.e., to roll very little with respect to the apparent	which was known as an uncomfortable ship until ex- 
vertical, rather  than  to the gravity  vertical (Chadwick,	tensive alterations were made to reduce its GM. (It 
1955).	was then renamed Matsonia).
  The  magnitude  of  rolling  depends  both  on the  re-		A study of Equation (173), Section 3.8, shows that 
lationship  between  ship and  wave  dimensions and on	the simplest way to achieve a long natural period of 
resonance  effects;  just  as  in  the  case of longitudinal	roll is to adopt a low value of metacentric height, GM. 
motions. But since a ship's  breadth  is always less than	Unfortunately, this affects  the  ship's  transverse  sta- 
its  length,  the  wavelengths   having significant effects	bility adversely, and the minimum stability standards 
on rolling  are  usually  much shorter  and therefore  oc-	discussed in Chapters II and III may not be met.  Re- 
cur  more  frequently.  Furthermore,  the  usual LIB   ra-	duction in GM may involve reduction in beam, which 
tios result  in less transverse  stability and less damping	is generally  unfavorable  to  damping.  Reducing  the 
of  transverse   motions,  with  consequent greater  sen-	transverse gyradius is helpful in increasing the natural 
sitivity  to  resonance  effects.  It  was  noted in Section	period, but it is usually governed by other design con-
3.8 that  magnification factors  of 10 are common when	siderations.
no artificial  damping  is introduced.  At the same time,			A special case is the semi-submersible floating plat- 
passive or active damping devices can be more effective		form often used for oil drilling. It makes use of buoy- 
than  for  other  motions, such as pitch.		ancy cylinders located well below the sea surface, with 
Hence, the  first  step  in design for reduced rolling is	an open structure of struts connecting them and sup- to  
introduce  artificial  damping,  bilge  keels being the		porting the platform above the water. These design 
simplest   and  most  effective  device.  Sharp or  short-		features take advantage of the fact that wave exci- 
radius  bilges  may  be  helpful  and  also an increase in		tation reduces rapidly with draft (Le., depth below the 
ship  breadth.  The  latter  will tend  to increase slightly		surface) and the open construction leads to small wa-
the  length  of  waves  required  to  excite rolling, but it	terplane moments of inertia, hence low stability but


 

peaks at resonance, over a narrow spread of wave 
frequencies, various devices other than bilge keels can 
be installed to further damp or otherwise reduce roll- 
ing, as discussed in Section 6. Many cruise ships and 
naval vessels are fitted with anti-rolling fins or passive 
anti-roll stabilizers, which are very effective in reduc- 
ing roll. Cargo ships can also benefit from having one 
or the other of these devices installed. But as with all 
ships, the reduction in rolling attainable must be 
weighed against the disadvantages of the added direct 
cost of the anti-roll device, and its added weight, drag 
and required space, all of which may detract from the 
earning power of the ship. Fortunately, with the pro- 
cedure for calculating voyage time as a function of 
season and route outlined in Section 7.8, the economic 
advantage of anti-roll stabilization can be quantified. 
Thus, the economic arguments for and against roll 
stabilization can be satisfactorily resolved, as consid- 
ered in Section 8.6.
  Another interesting  possibility discussed  in Section 
6 is the use of  rudders  for  control  of  roll as  well as 
of heading of the ship. This scheme has the advantage 
of making use of an existing system, with some mod- 
ifications, thus substantially reducing the cost, weight 
and resistance penalties. However, special care is re- 
quired to the design of rudders that will produce large 
transverse as well as longitudinal moments.
  Rolling is known to increase the resistance of a ship, 
although little quantitative data are  available. Exter- 
nal devices such as bilge keels or anti-rolling fins add 
their own resistance, but this effect is usually  more 
than balanced by the reduction in roll-induced resist- 
ance produced. Hence, well-designed devices may be 
expected to have a favorable effect on powering and 
hence on fuel consumption.
  Yawing and swaying in oblique seas, with the related 
rudder action, also increase resistance, but these ef- 
fects are relatively minor. A more important aspect 
may be the leeway angle experienced in bow seas. This 
leeway angle may give rise to an induced drag of 
appreciable magnitude.
  8.5	High-performance ships. The main emphasis of 
this book has been on conventional, monohull ships, 
but attention has also been given to other vehicle types 
that operate at the water-air interface. Since a  good 
deal of the incentive for investigating some of the 
newer interface vehicle types resides in their  promise 
to reduce motions in a seaway, some of the important 
seakeeping features of these newer vehicle types will 
be discussed in this section. For a more complete and 
also realistic discussion and appraisal of each type, 
particularly for naval applications, the reader is re- 
ferred to Eames (1981) and to the special February, 
1986, issue of the Naval Engineers Journal.
  (a)	Catamarans. An old type of craft that has been 
receiving attention in recent years is the catamaran, 
which can provide large deck areas and any degree of 
transverse stability, for use as a ferry, oceanographic


 




research ship or oil-drilling platform. Navy experience 
with the design of the oceanographic research cata- 
maran Hayes (Hadler, Lee, et a11974) has shown that 
relative bow motions were excessive in the open North 
Atlantic, resulting in slamming on the cross-structure. 
On the basis of research and development work at 
DTRC, a fixed hydrofoil was designed and installed 
forward between the two hulls to provide damping of 
pitch and heave. This was found to reduce relative bow 
motion and slamming to acceptable levels, and also 
reduced coupled roll-pitch or corkscrew motion.
  The above paper also discusses other aspects of the 
seakeeping design problems of the catamaran, includ- 
ing choice of overall dimensions and the  ratios  LIB 
and LIT. It is recommended that roll and pitch natural 
periods be kept as far apart as possible to minimize 
corkscrew motion. An extension of basic ship motion 
theory is presented to permit the calculation of coupled 
pitch-heave motions, and in addition the loads on cross- 
structure connecting the two hulls. It is recommended 
that the design of the damping  foil be undertaken  at 
the beginning of the catamaran design,  and a method 
for designing the foil is given.
  (b)	SWATH. A relatively new version of the older, 
twin-hull catamaran is the Small-Waterplane-Area 
Twin-Hull (SWATH), which is a noteworthy applica-


tion of the principle of supercritical 
operation dis- cussed in Section 4. The 
SWATH configuration includes two 
streamlined, totally submerged, longi- 
tudinally oriented, buoyant hulls of circular 
or elliptical cross section. These two hulls 
support, by  means  of one or more vertical 
surface-piercing  streamlined struts, the 
weight of a wide ship platform  spanning 
both hulls located substantially above the 
air-water interface. Since the rough water 
surface is penetrated only by the thin, 
small-waterplane-area struts, not only is the 
excitation by ocean waves of the vertical 
motions of the SWATH reduced, compared 
to a conventional surface ship or to a 
traditional catamaran, but long natural 
pitching and heaving  periods  result.  
Hence, the SWATH is capable of attaining 
high-speed super- critical operation in 
moderately  rough  head  seas,  up to the 
point at which severe slamming on the 
cross- structure begins.
  Numata (1980) described a number of 
SWATH ves- sels and gave  results  of 
model tests  of four  of them  in calm water 
and in waves. These showed clearly the 
relatively light damping in pitch and heave, 
as well as roll, which makes them very 
sensitive under conditions of resonance, 
also (Lee and Curphey, 19.77).Numata 
shows how the conditions for severe 
motion can be estimated by calculating the 
undamped natural period


MOTIONS IN  WAVES	173



of pitch and determining the forward speed that pro­ 
duces resonance with the component wave correspond­ 
ing to the peak of the wave spectrum (modal period). 
(Use is made of Fig. 78, Section 4, for this purpose). 
To attain supercritical operation in head seas the for­ 
ward speed must be well above this critical speed. 
However, as resonant conditions are approached, it has 
been found that fixed or controllable foils can provide 
effective damping of pitch and heave.
  In stern seas the long natural pitching and heaving 
periods may delay achievement of supercritical oper­ 
ation until very high, perhaps unrealistic, speeds, and 
will contribute to critical yaw motions at low speeds. 
To minimize these effects, the anti-pitching fins fitted 
forward and aft are effective. By canting these fins 
downward they may also be used as rudders, thus 
obviating the need for a separate rudder system for 
steering.
  Lee and Curphey (1977) have presented a modified 
linear theory for calculating SWATH motions. A strip 
method is used for obtaining hydrodynamic coeffi­ 
cients, and allowance is made for viscous damping 
effects and for the lift and moment of the stabilizing 
fins. Good results were obtained in comparing theo­ 
retical calculations of motion with experimental data 
on two models. However, improvement in theory is 
needed for the case of following waves, especially 
when controllable fins are to be used. McCreight (1987) 
gives a methodology for investigating the relationship 
between hull characteristics and seakeeping perform- 
ance. See also Lamb (1987).	·
  It is important to notice that SWATH ships (and 
most supercritical ships) must be designed to make a 
smooth transition between sub-critical and super-crit­ 
ical modes of operation. In the case of SWATH, as the 
wave height gets so large that cross-structure slam­ 
ming would occur, so does the wave period get large. 
This long wave period is in better tuning to the ship's 
heave period, and results in increased heave response, 
which may assist the ship in lifting itself above the 
oncoming wave and avoiding slams. In SWATH design 
the selection of heave natural period as a function of 
cross structure height is important.
  (c)	) Planing craft develop dynamic lift not by 
means of foils but rather by virtue of the angle  of 
attack of the relatively flat bottom of their hulls.  At 
low speed they are completely buoyantly supported, 
while at top speed they are partially supported by 
dynamic lift and partially by buoyancy.
  In smooth water and slightly rough seas planing 
craft can attain high (super-critical) speeds. But as 
seas become rougher severe pounding, with high ver­ 
tical accelerations, are experienced in head seas. 
Hence, the selection of suitable dead-rise angles is 
vitally important (Savitsky and Brown, 1976), (Martin, 
1978).
  An interesting development of a planing craft with 
high rough-water speeds is the so-called Sea Knife



(Payne, 1974). The hull is narrow, so that the planing surface is 
relatively small and the waterline endings very sharp. This 
permits the hull to cut through the waves and attain a 
supercritical condition of operation.
  (d)	Hydrofoil craft. Among the dynamically sup­ ported 
vehicles, the hydrofoil ship is like the SWATH ship in that the 
hull is also carried above the water surface by struts. But in the 
hydrofoil case the support is provided by transversely oriented, 
hydrodynamic lifting surfaces (hydrofoils) rather than by 
longitu­ dinally-oriented buoyant hulls. Many commercial hy­ 
drofoil ships are built with fixed transverse foils incorporating a 
dihedral so oriented that the hydrofoils pierce the free surface in 
the normal flying mode. This arrangement provides the vehicle 
with inherent ver­ tical, transverse and longitudinal stability. On 
the other hand, most military and some commercial hy­ drofoil 
craft are built with completely submerged hy­ drofoils, having 
little or no dihedral, which require an automatic control system 
to provide vehicle stability. Ships with submerged foils have the 
advantage of re­ duced drag and reduced motions in rough seas, 
but are considerably more expensive to build than hydro­ foil 
craft with surface-piercing foils.
  Hydrofoil craft can easily attain supercritical oper­ ation in 
seas of moderate severity, when the hull is carried clear of the 
wave crests. Some problems in seakeeping design of both types 
of hydrofoil craft and methods of solution are discussed by 
Hirsch (1967) and Johnson (1985).
  (e)	ACVand SES craft. Both Air Cushion Vehicles (ACV) 
and Surface Effect Ships (SES) are supported by a pressurized 
cushion of air between the water surface and the bottom of the 
vehicle. With the ACV the air cushion is contained within a 
flexible peripheral skirt around the entire hull. Using air 
propulsion, ACV may be a truly amphibious craft. In contrast to 
the ACV, the SES has two sidewalls that penetrate the water 
surface and help contain the air cushion. They not only decrease 
cushion air losses but also increase water drag and deny 
amphibious operation to the SES. Resistance "hump" 
characteristics dictate that an SES designed for speeds between 
40 and 60 knots incor­ porate a high length-to-beam ratio. These 
speeds may be sub-or supercritical depending on sea conditions.
  ACVs have been extensively developed in Great Brit­ ain under 
the designation hovercraft. They have been successful in 
commercial operation, notably in provid­ ing regular ferry service 
across the English Channel. These craft have low LIB ratios, and 
their seakeeping performance depends greatly on their ability to 
main­ tain height  above the water  surface  to clear  the tops of the 
waves. Seakeeping problems are discussed by Lavis (1972), 
Moran, Fein and Magnuson (1974) and Behar, Kennell, et al 
(1985).
  For SES craft equations of motion with six degrees of freedom 
are presented in a paper by Kaplan, Bent­ son and Davis (1981), 
where the important differences


174	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


in dynamic behavior between SES and conventional SWATH design with a long period might be suitable. mono-
hulls are discussed. It is interesting to note that In fact,  McCreight and Stahl  (1985)  have attempted  a pitch / 
heave wave excitation forces on the SES arise seakeeping  performance  assessment  of  several  de- mainly from 
variations in the buoyancy of the im-  signs of each type, indicating the  circumstances  under mersed sidewalls, 
since "the greater part of the wave- which either might be preferred. Kennell, et al (1985) induced forces are 
imparted through the air cushion compared two monohull designs and a SWATH.
at a uniform pressure." Rolling motion is affected by For most ships, regardless of speed, the  critical and 
sidewall draft, which determines when sidewall emer- sub-critical ranges of operation govern design for sea- 
gence will occur, and by distance between sidewalls keeping. This usually calls for  short  natural  periods 
relative to KG, which affects the natural period of roll. of pitch and heave, together with as high damping as
Verification  of  theoretical   motion  calculations  by	possible.
model tests is complicated by the fact that cushion air It is also important to decide as soon as possible in  
pressure does not follow Froude  scaling. The  proce-  the  design  as  to  whether  or  not  special  anti-rolling 
dure adopted is to carry out computer calculations "for devices (other than  bilge  keels)  or  anti-pitching  fins  
the same test conditions at the same scale as the model are to be considered (See Section 6).
itself  is  experiencing.  The  results   of  the model test		In a chapter, "Mission Analysis and Basic Design," 
and the computer program outputs are then to be com- by R. K. Kiss (Taggart, 1980) the importance of con- 
pared."   If the  theory  is thus  verified for model scale,	sidering rough weather performance early in the de- 
then  it  can  be used  with  confidence to compute full-	sign of any ship is emphasized (Section 3, Concept 
scale motions. In the  work of Kaplan,  et al (1981),  the	Design). It is explained that, "for any particular set 
theory  was found to agree  reasonably  well with model	of requirements, there is an infinite number of com- 
tests   for  pitch  and  heave  in  head  seas  for  six SES	binations which give the transport or mission capabil- 
designs  for which model results  were available. A few	ity desired; i.e., for cargo ships: capacity, deadweight, 
comparisons  with  full-scale  test   craft have indicated	speed  and  endurance."	Computer-aided parametric 
generally  good results  from combined model tests and	studies provide a means for exploring a wide range of 
theoretical  calculations. But direct comparisons are dif-	ship proportions and form, and determining those com- 
ficult because  of wave  measurement  problems at sea.	binations that provide acceptable technical solutions.
  In general, SES craft experience high vertical ac- The guidelines in Sections 8.1-8.5 can be used in de- 
celerations  in head  seas  because  of the high frequen-	ciding what alternate design configurations and range 
cies   of   wave   encounter    and   the pressure   pulses	of hull characteristics are to be explored. It is partic- 
experienced with air leakage in the bow-up condition. ularly important that a wide range of lengths be  in-  
Hence,  some type  of  ride  control  system is required	eluded. The  next  step  is  then  to  produce  alternate 
on an SES operating  in the  open sea. This involves the	preliminary or concept designs for consideration. Sea- 
controlled  alteration  of  cushion  air  pressure and has	keeping evaluations can then be carried out and finally, 
been  quite  successful  (Kaplan,  et al 1981).	a selection made of the final design on the basis of
8.6	Seakeeping  Design  Procedures.  (a)   General.	economics, as discussed subsequently.
Because of the  importance to seakeeping performance		For the seakeeping evaluation,  the  theory  of  ship 
of  ship  or  "platform"    configuration and dimensions,	motions presented in Sections 3 and 4 provides valuable 
it  is clear  that  for  best  results seakeeping considera-	tools for predicting the motions of a specific hull, or 
tions should be taken into account at the earliest stages	comparing alternative designs, in specific sea  condi-  
of design,  before  basic  dimensions  and other  param-	tions at stated speeds and headings. For our purpose 
eters   have  been  selected.  Hence,  it  is  important  to	these studies must inelude the derived responses dis- 
consider rational design procedures that make  this pos-	cussed in Section 5 that correspond to the criteria pre- 
sible.	sented in Section 7. These include accelerations at
  For high-speed ships an early consideration  is  critical points, frequency  of slamming  and of shipping 
whether the mission or service of the ship involves water, and added resistance and power. Calculations  
primarily sub- or super-critical operation in rough seas. may be supplemented  by self-propelled model tests  in 
All ships, no matter how designed, achieve super-crit- irregular  waves,  especially  when  estimates  based  on 
ical operation if the sea state is mild enough, but in empirical data must be used.
the  severe  seas  often  experienced  in  the open ocean			Repeated computer calculations provide the best 
most ships cannot be expected to push above the crit-		means of  identifying  directly  the  precise effect  of 
ical  zone,  and  therefore   the  sub-critical (or  critical)		changing the various parameters defining hull propor- 
regime  has  more  influence  on  design. However,  for		tions and form. Each parameter affects the various 
high-performance  craft,  such  as  are  discussed in the		coefficients in the equations of motion differently, and 
preceding  sub-section,  there  may  be  a choice, which		the coefficients depend in turn on frequency of wave 
can  have  a drastic  effect on the design.		encounter, forward speed, etc. Furthermore, coupling 
For  example,  there  are  certain  missions for which	between modes of motions, phase angles and forward 
either  a fine, monohull with  short  pitching period or a		speed influence the manner in which the various terms


MOTIONS   IN  WAVES	175



in the equations interact. Therefore, several sets of 
calculations-perhaps supplemented by comparative 
model tests-are needed.
  It should be noted that the calculation of power 
requirements in different sea conditions, ship headings 
and speeds is needed not only for the seakeeping eval- 
uation (SPI-2) but also for the  reliable  determination 
of required installed power for the  machinery  design 
of a fast ship in a rough-weather service, where an 
arbitrary percentage addition to trial power would be 
unsatisfactory (Lewis, 1958). If the calculated average 
voyage speed is not adequate for the proposed oper- 
ating schedule there are two steps possible in the de- 
sign stage. One is to increase the maximum power in 
order that speed can be increased when the more mod- 
erate sea conditions prevail; the service power require- 
ment would then be determined by the duration of the 
periods of more moderate seas during which the time 
lost must be made up. The other method of decreasing 
voyage time is to modify ship size, proportions, free- 
board, ballast capacity, or other characteristics in or- 
der to raise the limiting speeds in the more severe sea 
conditions.
  The seakeeping evaluation of alternative designs in- 
volves the choice of a suitable index, as discussed in 
Section 7. For merchant ships, and naval transit mis- 
sions, the principal measure of seakeeping perform- 
ance is the Transit Speed Index, SPI-2. Since this 
involves both voluntary and involuntary speed reduc- 
tion it depends on both ship motions and added power 
required in waves. For most naval ships' the principal 
index is that of Mission Effectiveness, SPI-1, which 
involves the many factors discussed in Section 7. This 
index also applies to survey vessels  and  fishing craft 
on station.
  Although the procedures discussed in Section 7 for 
calculating the seakeeping performance indexes were 
intended mainly for naval vessels, they can be ap- 
plied-perhaps with some  shortcuts-to  commercial 
ships as well. These techniques involve the use of 
Speed Polar Plots, with Seakeeping Operating Envel- 
opes (SOE), the Operability Index (01) as a  function  
of sea state and finally the appropriate overall, long- 
term Seakeeping Performance Index (SPI-1 or 2). Sep- 
arate discussions follow for merchant and naval ships.
  (b)	Merchant  ship  evaluation.  Having  established 
a number of alternative acceptable concept hull de- 
signs, the principal subjects for study are motions and 
added power requirements in waves. Using the tech- 
niques discussed in previous sections, ship responses 
can be predicted in different representative sea con- 
ditions, at various speeds and headings, and estimates 
made of attainable speed and required power. Consid- 
ering the frequency of occurrence of the different sea 
conditions expected in the ship's service, the average 
voyage speeds or times (SPI-2) can be estimated for 
different seasons, along with the corresponding power 
requirements.



  Procedures for technical evaluation have been pre- sented 
by Chryssostomidis (1972), Bringloe (1978) and Hutchison 
(1981) in more or less detail. However, the final evaluation 
should be in economic terms (Mandel and Leopold, 1966). 
This may be done on the basis of Required Freight Rate 
(RFR), computed first for each design under ideal fine 
weather conditions. To obtain RFR under operational sea 
conditions the ship per- formance calculations must be 
extended to cover fuel consumption at reduced speeds, and 
effects of rough weather delays on port times, hence on 
cargo handling and other terminal costs. The final evaluation 
may then be in the form of a plot of overall annual RFR 
against ship length, first under ideal calm weather and then 
under actual anticipated service conditions. Such a plot 
would not only establish the optimum design but would 
indicate the penalties involved in departure from the 
optimum because of considerations of first cost, ter- minal or 
port restrictions, etc.
  Although the approach to merchant ship design just 
described is not in general use, current research spon- sored 
by the H-7 Panel of SNAME has developed the procedure in 
more detail and  applied it  to the  design of a 21-knot 
container ship for North Atlantic service (Sellars and 
Setterstrom, 1987). Fig. 135 is a plot of results tabulated in 
the paper for alternative designs intended to provide regular 
weekly liner service be- tween New York and a European 
port with three ships of 1290 TEU capacity (7,600 miles 
round trip). Prelim- inary economic studies of ships 175 to 
251 m (575 to 825 ft) in length had established that under 
ideal calm water conditions the minimum RFR was obtained 
with a 183-m (600-ft) ship (0.55 block coefficient). Designs 
for seakeeping evaluation in the figure ranged  from 183 to 
251m (600 to 825 ft) in length and 169 to 78 in W /(L/ 
100)3,using the better of two operating sched- ules studied. 
Comparative costs are expressed in terms






176	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


of RFR/TEU,   where  RFR is based on total operating			An example is given by Lin, Day, et al (1984) in 
costs,  including  annualized  initial  costs  and costs of	which the foregoing procedure was followed in a naval 
cargo  handling  and of fuel  at  $156 per long ton.	ship design and an excellent compromise obtained by: 
It  may be seen in the figure that  the optimum design		• Keeping a large value of Cwand small value of under 
realistic operating  conditions is the one with 229-		Cvp in the forebody to favor good seakeeping without
m (750-ft) length, which is substantially different from significant effect on resistance.
the 183-m (600-ft) length determined for calm water .• Adopting a wide transom stern instead of a cruiser 
However, the difference in RFR is only $10/TEU or stern, to improve the resistance  without  reducing  wa-  
about 1 percent. The question remains as to whether terplane coefficient.
or not the saving (in fuel and cargo handling costs) is Economics should  not  be  neglected  in  the  case  of  
worth the extra initial and operating costs. The paper naval vessels, but  design  studies  are  often  limited to 
notes  that  a benefit-to-eost ratio,  defined as the  ratio  considering  initial  cost  in relation  to  overall  mission 
of fuel and cargo  handling cost reductions  to the  sum  performance,  without  attention  to operating  costs.  In 
of  increases  in  capital  and  operating  costs,  is  about     time of war  it  can be argued  that  economic consider-
1.8 for the 229-m (750-ft) ship; 2.0 for the 312-m (700- ations in the  design  of naval  ships are  definitely sec-  
ft) design. For longer trade routes, such as Seattle to ondary to mission performance.  Yet  even then,  since 
Tokyo, the  savings  are  expected to be greater.	cost represents an index of resources expended, both
  (c)	U.S. Navy design procedure. Following a Navy physical and manpower, economics cannot be over- 
Seakeeping Workshop (NAVSEC, 1975)the U.S. Navy looked. In any case, it can also be argued that in peace- 
not only accelerated its seakeeping research but began  time federal  budget  limitations dictate that  both initial 
the development of procedures  that  allowed seakeep-  and operating  costs  be given  full  consideration in de- 
ing to be incorporated into the routine process of sur- sign (Leopold, 1974).
face  ship hull  design.  The procedure,  as described in			It has been shown that the economic evaluation of 
Section 7 and  in Keane  and Sandberg (1984), involves		commercial ship designs usually involves the total an- 
the  evaluation  of  seakeeping  performance of alterna-		nual cost, including both the annualized (or amortized) 
tive designs,  along  with the  evaluation  of  speed and		initial cost and the annual operating cost; which can 
power  and  of  maneuverability.   Use  is  made of the		then be related to the annual quantity of cargo carried. 
Seakeeping   Performance   Indexes   also discussed  in		In the case of many government projects, it has been 
Section  7,  and   described   by   Comstock and  Keane		customary to take the alternative approach of deter- 
(1980). Examples of the evaluation of alternative naval		mining the life-cycle cost, Le., the initial cost plus the 
designs   were   given  in  Comstock,  et  al (1980), Mc-		total lifetime operating cost. For ships (or fleets of 
Creight  and  Stahl (1985) and Kennell, et al (1985), as		ships) the design that would accomplish a desired mis- 
well as  in Sections 7.7-7.8.		sion (or group of missions) at the lowest life-cycle cost 
An important  refinement  introduced by Lin, Day, et	would then be the optimum design. As a practical mat-
al (1984) was to "evaluate  the seakeeping performance   ter,  only initial costs  are  usually  considered  in naval 
at the same time, or preferably before, optimizing the design procedures.
hull form  for powering, within given constraints."  As  An example of a military  economic study  was  given 
they explain,  in the  traditional  hydrodynamic  design  by Gatzoulis and Keane (1977) for the case of proposed 
of hull forms, the primary consideration has been to installation of active fin stabilizers  on a class  of frig- 
achieve good  performance  in  calm-water  resistance  ates, with respect  to helicopter operations. Operational 
and powering. Seakeeping usually has not been con- effectiveness was evaluated  in  terms  of  percentage- 
sidered in selecting the primary hull form design pa- time that helicopter operations could  be  performed 
rameters. However, Bales (1980) developed an with certain  assumed  profiles of ship speed  vs. time, 
approximate Seakeeping Rank Estimator and demon- heading to the sea and sea state. Hence, it was possible 
strated that the use of such a method based on ship- to determine the  improved effectiveness of the frigate  
motion theory can provide major improvements in the with stabilizers and to compare this with the initial 
seakeeping characteristics of a hull  design.  It  was  cost of their  installation.  In this case it was found that  
feared that such hull designs optimized for seakeeping the effectiveness increased many times faster than the 
alone might sustain higher-than-normal resistance. cost.
  Experience and theoretical analyses have shown that Brown (1985) presents a method of placing a dollar calm-
sea resistance characteristics of a hull design are value on the seakeeping  performance  of surface  war- more 
sensitive than seakeeping characteristics to local ships. The method is based  on the assumption  that  the hull 
geometry changes. Therefore, Lin, Day, et  al felt  value  of  the  ship  is  equal  to  the  total  cost  per  day that if a 
hull is'optimized first  for  seakeeping,  it  is  (capital  charges  plus  operating  expenses)  of keeping likely to 
have enough flexibility for additional modifi- the ship at sea. This value can be determined both for cations in 
local geometry to reduce resistance while ideal, calm sea conditions and for several sea states, maintaining good 
seakeeping  characteristics,  but  not  and  then  a  weighted  average  calculated  for  an  ex- vice versa.	pected 
profile of sea states.


MOTIONS IN WAVES	177


REFERENCES


ments for 
Dry 
Foredecks: 
A Desi.gn 
Procedure," 
Pro-


Abkowitz,  M.A. (1959), "The  Effect of Antipitching	ceedings, SNAME Star Symposium, Houston.
Fins  on  Ship  Motions,"  SNAME Transactions,   Vol.	Bales, N.K. (1980), "Optimizing the Seakeeping Per-
67.	formance of Destroyer-Type Hulls," 13th ONR Sym- 
Abkowitz,  M.A., Vassilopoulos, L.A. and Sellars, F.	posium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Tokyo.
(1966),  "Recent  Developments  in  Seakeeping  Re-   Bales,  N.K., and  Day, (1982), "Experimental   Eval- 
search and its Application to Design," SNAME Trans- uation of a Destroyer-Type Hull Optimized for Sea- 
actions,  Vol 74.	keeping," SNAME, STAR Symposium.
  Abkowitz, M.A. (1969), "Stability  and  Control  of  Bales, N.K., and Cieslowski, D.S. (1981), "A  Guide  
Ocean Vehicles,"  MIT Press,  Cambridge, Mass.	to Generic Seakeeping Performance Assessment," Na-
Aertssen,  G. (1966), "Service  Performance and Sea-	val Engineers Journal, April.
keeping Trials  of M.V. Jordaens,"   Trans. RINA, Lon-		Bales, S.L. et al (1975), "Rigid Body Ship Responses 
don, Vol. 114	for a Series of LNG Ships," DTRC Report SPD-517-
Aertssen,   G. (1968), "Laboring   of  Ships in Rough	04.
Seas with Special Emphasis on the Fast Ship," SNAME			Bales, S.L., Lee, W.T. and Voelker, J.M. (1981), 
Diamond Jubilee  International  Meeting.		"Standardized	Wave and Wind Environments for 
Aertssen,   G., and  van  Sluijs, M.F. (1972), "Service	NATO Operational Areas," DTRC Report SPD-0919-
Performance   and  Seakeeping  Trials  on a Large  Con-	01.
tainer  Ship,"  Trans.  RINA,  London, Vol 114.			Bales, S.L., Cummins, W.E., and Comstock, E.N. 
Allen,  R.G. and  RR.  Jones  (1978), "Structural   De-	(1982), "Potential Impact of Twenty Year Hindcast sign-
Limit Pressures   on High Performance Marine Ve-		Wind and Wave Climatology in Ship Design," Marine
hicles," AIAA and SNAME Advanced Marine Vehicles	Technology, Vol. 19 No.2, April.
Conference.			Bales, S.L. (1982), "Development and Application of 
Andrew,   RN.   and  A.RJ.M.   Lloyd (1981),  "Full-	a Deep Water Hindcast Wave and Wind Climatology," 
Scale  Comparative  Measurements   of the Behavior of		International Symposium on Wave and Wind Climate
Two Frigates   in Severe  Rough  Seas,"  Trans.  RINA,	Worldwide, RINA, London.
London, Vol. 116.		Band, E.G.D. (1964), "A Rational Basis for Deter- 
Ankudinov,  V.K. (1972), "The  Added Resistance of	mining Bow Freeboard of Large Tankers," Webb In-
a  Moving Ship in Waves,"  International	Shipbuild-	stitute Report.
ing  Progress, Vol. 19..			Barber, N.F. (1963), "The Directional  Resolving 
Bai, K.J.  and  McCarthy,  J.H.  (Eds.) (1979), DTRC	Power of an Array of Wave Detectors," in Proceedings 
Proceedings,	Workshop   on   Ship  Wave-Resistance		of Conf., published as Ocean Wave Spectra, Prentis-
Computations.	Hall, New York.
  Baitis, A.E. et al (1976a), "Prediction of Extreme Barr, RA. and Ankudinov, V. (1977), "Ship Rolling, 
Ammunition Cargo Forces at Sea," DTRC Report SPD- Its Prediction and Reduction Dsing Roll Stabilization," 
704-01.	Marine Technology, Vol. 14, No.!.
  Baitis, A.E. (1975), "Influence of Ship Motion on Bassett, P.R and  Hodgkinson,  F.P.  (1935), "New 
Operations of SH-2F Helicopters from DE 1052 Class Studies of Ship Motions," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 
Ships,"  DTRC Report SPD-556-01.	43.
  Baitis, A.E., Appleby, T.R, and Meyers, W.G. (1981),		Bates,    J.L.  (1945),  "Large	Passenger-Carrying 
"Validation   of  the   Standard   Ship Motion Program,	Ships for Certain Essential Trade Routes," and Dis- 
SMP:   Ship Motion  Transfer	Function  Prediction,"	cussion, SNAME Transactions, Vol. 53.
DTRC Report SPD-0936-03.			Bebar, M.R., Kennell, C., White, W. and Lavis, D. 
Baitis, A.E.,  Woolaver,  D.A., and Beck, T.A. (1983),	(1985),   "Advanced	Marine   Vehicles-a	Review," 
"Rudder   Roll  Stabilization  for  Coast Guard  Cutters		Workshop on Hull Form Design, MARIN, Wagenin-
and  Frigates,"   Naval Engineers  Journal.	gen, the Netherlands.
  Baitis, A.E. et al (1976b), "A Non-Aviation Ship Mo- Beck, RF.  (1982), "Relative  Motion Components for 
tion Data  Base  for  the  DD963, CC 26, FF  1052, FFG   a  Mathematical  Form  in  Regular  Waves,"  Proceed- 
7 and the FF 1040 Ship Classes," DTRC Report SPD- ings, 14th Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Dni- 788-
01.	versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
  Bales, N.K. and Cummins, W.E. (1970), "The  Influ-  Beck,  RF.  and  Troesch,  A.W. (1980),  "Wave  Dif- 
ence of Hull Form on Seakeeping," SNAME Trans-  fraction  Effects  in Head  Seas,"  International  Ship- 
actions,  Vol. 78.	building Progress, Vol. 27.
  Bales,  N.K.  (1978),  "Notes  Regarding  Wave-In-  Bell, J.  and  Walker,  W.P.  (1966),  "Activated  and  
duced Performance Limitations of Destroyer and Frig- Passive Controlled Fluid  Tank  System  for  Ship Sta-  
ates  (D),"  DTRC Report SPD-C-811-02.	bilization," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 74.
Bales,  N.K.  (1979), "Minimum Freeboard  Require-	Bendat, J.S., and Piersol, A.G. (1971), Random


178	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


Data: Analysis   and  Measurement Procedures, Wiley-		Cartwright, D.E., and Longuet-Higgins, M.S.(1956), 
Interscience,  New York.	Proceedings, Royal Society of London, Series A., Vol.
Bermejo,  R.T.  (1965),  "Added  Mass and Damping	237.
Coefficientsfor Ships Heaving in Smooth Water," MIT		Chadwick, J.H. and Klotter, K. (1954), "On the Dy- 
Report No. 65-5.	namics of Anti-Rolling Tanks," Schiffstechnik, Band
Beukelman, W. and Buitnhek, M. (1973), "Full Scale	2, Heft 3.
Measurements  and Predicted Seakeeping Performance		Chadwick, J.H., (1955),  "On  the  Stabilization  of 
of the Container ShipAtlantic   Crown," International	Roll," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 63.
Shipbuilding    Progress,  Vol. 21, No. 243.		Chang, M-S and Pien, P.C. (1975), "Hydrodynamic 
Beukelman,  W. and Huijser,  A. (1977), "Variations	Forces on a Body Moving Beneath a Free Surface,"
of  Parameters	Determining  Seakeeping,"  Interna-	Proceedings,   First   International   Conference  on Nu-
tional  Shipbuilding    Progress,  Vol. 24, No. 275.	merical Ship Hydrodynamics, DTRC, Bethesda, Md. 
Beukelman,  W.  (1979),  "Bottom Impact Pressures		Chang,  M-S. and Pien, P.C. (1976), "Velocity Poten-
Due  to  Forced  Oscillations,"  Delft Technical Univer-		tials of Submerged Bodies Near a Free  Surface-Ap- 
sity  Report No. 479.		plication to Wave-Excited Forces and Motions," 
Bhattacharyya,  R. (1978), Dynamics  of Marine  Ve-	Proceedings, 11th Symposium on Naval Hydrodynam-
hicles,  Chapter  14 - "Motion  Stabilization," Wiley In-	ics, London.
terscience, New York.			Chang, M-S. (1977), "Computations of Three-Di- 
Bishop, R.C., and  Bales, N.K.  (1978), "A Synthesis	mensional Ship Motions with Forward Speed," Pro- of  
Bow  Wave  Profile  and  Change  of  Level for  De-		ceedings, 2nd International Conference on Numerical 
stroyer-type   Hulls,   with   Application to  Computing		Ship Hydrodynamics, University of California, Berke-
Freeboard Requirements," DTRC Report No. 78-SPD- ley, Cal.
811-01.			Chapman, R.B. (1975), "Numerical Solution for Hy- 
Bishop,   R.E.D.,   Price,   W.G.   and   Tam,   P.K.Y.	drodynamic Forces on a Surface-Piercing Plate Oscil- 
(1978a),  "The  Representation  of Hull Sections and its		lating	in	Yaw	and	Sway,"	Proceedings,	1st 
Effects on Estimated  Hydrodynamic Actions and Wave		International Conference on Numerical Ship Hydro-
Responses,"   Trans.,  RINA, Vol. 121.	dynamics, DTRC, Bethesda, Md.
  Bishop, R.E.D., Price,  W.G.  and  Tam,  P.K.Y.  Chase, J.,  Cote, L.J., et  al. (1960), "The  Directional 
(1978b), "Hydrodynamic Coefficientsof Some Heaving Spectrum of a Wind-Generated Sea as Determined 
Cylinders of Arbitrary Shape," International  Jour-  from  Data  Obtained by the  Stereo Wave Observation 
nalfor    Numerical   Methods in Engineering.	Project," New York University, College of Engineer-
Bishop, R.E.D.,  Price, W.G. and Temarel, P. (1980),	ing Report.
"Hydrodynamic Coefficients of Some Swaying and Chen,  H.T.,  Chen,  H.H.,  and  Hoffman,  D.  (1979), 
Rolling Cylinders of Arbitrary Shape," International "The Implementation of the 20-year Hindcast Wave 
Shipbuilding    Progress,  Vol. 27, Number 307.	Data in the Design and Operation of Marine Struc-
Blok,  J.J.  and  Beukelman,  W.  (1984), "The  High-	tures," Offshore Technology Conference.
Speed  Displacement  Ship  Systematic  Series  Hull   Chou, S.J., Oakley, O.H., Paulling,  J.R.,  van  Slyke, 
Forms - Seakeeping Characteristics," SNAME R., Wood, P.D. and Zink, P.F. (1974), "Ship Motions 
Transactions,   Vol. 92.	and Capsizing in Astern Seas," U.S. Coast Guard Re-
Borodai,  I.K.  and  Netsvetayev,   Y.A. (1969), Ship	port, No. CD-D-103-75.
Motions  in  Ocean Waves, (in Russian), Sudostorenie,		Chryssostomidis, C. (1972), "Seakeeping Consider- 
Leningrad.	ations in a Total Design Methodology," 9th ONR Sym-
Borresen,  R.  (1980),  "On  the Irregular  Frequency	posium on Naval Hydrodynamics.
Problem  in the  Theory  of  Ship Motions," Det norske		Comstock, E. and Keane, R.G., (1980), "Seakeeping 
Veritas,  Report No. 80-0674.	by Design," Naval Engineers Journal, Vol. 92, No.
Bretschneider, C.L. (1952), "The Generation and De- 2.
cay of Wind Waves in Deep Water,"  Trans. American		Comstock, E.N., Bales, S.L. and Keane, R.G. (Com- 
Geophysical Union, Vol. 37.	stock, et al) (1980), "Seakeeping in Ship Operations,"
Bretschneider,    C.L.  (1957),  "Review of  Practical	SNAME STAR Symposium, San Diego.
Methods for  Observing  and Forecasting Ocean Waves		Conolly, J.E. and Goodrich, G.J. (1970), "Sea Trials 
by  Means  of  Wave  Spectra   and Statistics,"   Trans.	of Antipitching Fins," Trans. RINA, Vol. 112.
American  Geophysical Union, April.		Cox, G.G. and Lloyd, A.R. (1977), "Hydrodynamic 
Bringloe,  J.T.  (1978),  "Application  of Seakeeping	Design Basis for Navy Ship Roll Motion Stabilization,"
Analysis,"  Marine  Technology, Oct.	SNAME Transactions, Vol. 85.
  Brown,  D.K. (1985), "The  Value  of Reducing Ship		Cummins, W.E. (1959), Discussion of Abkowitz 
Motions,"  Naval  Engineers  Journal,  March.	(1959).
  Canham,  H.J.S.,  Cartwright,   D.E., Goodrich, G.J.,	Cummins, W.E. (1962), "The  Impulse  Response 
and Hogben, N. (1962), "Seakeeping Trials on O.W.S. Function and Ship Motions," Schiffstechnik, Vol. 9. 
Weather  Reporter,"   Trans., RINA, London.	Cummins, W.E. (1974), "Pathologies of the Transfer


MOTIONS IN WAVES	179


Functions," SNAME T&R Symposium S-3 on Sea-  DOD (1981), "Human  Engineering  Design  Criteria 
keeping.	for Military Systems, Equipment and Facilities," MIL-
Cummins,  W.E.  and   Bales,   S. (1980),  "Extreme	STD 1472c.
Value and Rare  Occurrence Wave Statistics  for North-   Donelan,  M., and  Pierson,  W.J.  (1983), "The  Sam- 
ern Hemispheric Shipping Lanes," SNAME STAR pling Variability of Estimates of Spectra of Wind-Gen- 
Symposium.	erated Gravity Waves," Journal of Geophysical
Cummins, W.E., Bales, S.L., and Gentile, D.M. Research, Vol. 88, No. C7.
(1981), "Hindcasting Waves for Engineering Appli- Eames, M.C. (1980), "Advances  in Naval  Architec- 
cations," Proceedings of the Symposium on Hydro- ture for Future Surface  Warships,"  The  Naval  Ar- 
dynamics in Ocean Engineering, Norwegian chitect.
Hydrodynamic  Laboratories,  Trondheim, Norway.		Ewing, J.A. (1967), "The Effect of Speed, Forebody 
Dalzell, J.F.  and  Yamanouchi, Y. (1958), "Analysis	Shape and Weight Distribution on Ship Motions,"
of Model Tests  in Irregular  Seas to Determine Motions	Trans. RINA, London.
Amplitudes  and Phase  Relationships  to Waves," Dav-		Ewing, J.A. (1975), "Some results from the Joint idson  
Laboratory   Report,  Stevens  Institute  of Tech-	North Sea Wave Project of Interest to Engineers," 
nology.		Proceedings, Symposium on the Dynamics of Marine 
Dalzell,J.F.(1962),   "Cross-spectral  Analysis of Ship	Vehicles and Structures in Waves, April 1974, Insti-
Model Motions: a Destroyer  Model in Irregular  Long-	tution of Mechanical Engineers, London.
crested  Head  Seas,"  Davidson Laboratory Report 810,		Exp. Tank Com. of Japan (1954), "An Investigation 
Stevens  Institute  of Technology.		into the Seagoing Qualities of the S.S. Nissei Maru 
Dalzell, J.F.  (1963), "Some  Further Experiments on	by Actual and Mod~l Ship Experiments," Seventh
the  Application of Linear  Superposition Techniques to	ITTC.
the Responses of a Destroyer Model in Extreme Long- Faltinsen, O. (1971), "Wave Forces on a Restrained 
crested Head Seas," Davidson Laboratory Report 918, Ship in Head Sea Waves," Ph.D. Thesis, University of 
Stevens  Institute  of Technology.	Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich.
  Da!zell,  J.F.  (1964),  "~n   Inve~tigation of Midship		Faltinsen, O.M. (1974), "A Numerical Investigation 
BendIng  Moments  ExperIen~ed  In Extre.me Regular	of the Ogilvie Tuck Formulas for Added Mass and 
Waves by Models of the  Manner  Type ShIp and Three	Damping  Coefficients"  Journal	of Ship Research 
Variants,"   Ship Structure  Committee, SSC-155.	Vol. 18 No.2.	'		,
  Da!zell, J.F. (1964), "~n Inve~tigation of Midship Falti~sen, O.M., and Michelsen, F.C.  (1974),  "Mo- 
BendIng Moments ExperIenced In Extreme Regular tions  of  Large  Structures  in Waves  at  Zero Froude  
Waves by Model~of a Tanker and a Destroyer," Ship Number," Proceedings, International Symposium on 
Structure  CommIttee, SSC-156.	Dynamics of Marine Vehicles in Waves University
Dalzell, J.F.  (1976), "Application  of the Functional	College  London.	'
PolY?;10miaMl odel ~  the  Ship Added Resistan?e  Pro~-        Falti~sen,  O.M. (1983), "Bow  Flow and  Added Re- 
lem,. 11th SymposIUmon Naval HydrodynamICs,Um- sistance of Slender Ships at High Froude Number and 
versIty College, Lond?n.	".	Low Wave Lengths," Journal of Ship Research, Vol.
Dalzell, J.F.,  and  KIm, C.H. (1976),   AnalytIcal In-	27 Number 3
vestigation. of the ,9uad~atic Frequency Response for .Frank, W.  (1967),  "Oscillation  of  Cylinders  in  or 
Added ReSIstance, DaVIdsonLaboratory Report SIT- Below the Free Surface of Deep Fluids" Report Num- DL-
76-1878,Stevens  Institute  of Technology.	ber  2375  DTRC Bethesda  Md	'
Davidson,  K.S.M. (1948),  "A  Note  on Steering  of	"	,.	"
Ships in Following Seas,"  Proceedings,  7th  Interna-  .Fra~k,  W.. and  Salvesen,  N. (197,?)'  Frank  Close- 
tional Congress for Applied Mechanics, London, Vol. FIt ShIp-MotIOnComputer Program, Report No. 3289,
2.	DTRC, Bethesda, Md.
  Day, W.G., Reed, A.M. and Lin, W.C. (1977), "Ex- Fridsma, G. (1969), "A Systematic Study of  the 
perimental and Prediction Techniques for Estimating ~ough Water Performance of  Planing  Boats.•••Dav-  
Added Power Requirements in a  Seaway,"  Proceed-  Idson  Laboratory  Report  1275, Stevens  InstItute  of 
ings,  18th ATTC, Annapolis, Md.	Technology.
  DeJong,  B.  (1973),  "Computation  of the Hydrody-		Froude, W. (1861), "On the Rolling of  Ships," 
namic  Coefficients of  Oscillating Cylinders," Nether-	Trans., INA, London.
lands  Ship Research  Center Report.		Fujii, H. and Takahashi, T. (1975), "Experimental 
Demanche, J.F.  (1968), "Added  Mass and Damping	Study on Lateral Motions of a Ship in Waves," Inter-
Coefficients For Cylinders with a Bulb-Like Cross-Sec- national Conference on Stability of Ships and Ocean  
tion Oscillating in a Free Surface," M.S. Thesis, MIT, Vehicles, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow.
Cambridge, Mass.		Garrison, C.J. (1974), "Hydrodynamics of Large Ob- 
Dillon,  E.S.,  and  Lewis,  E.V.  (1955), "Ships  with	jects in the Sea Part I: Hydrodynamics Analysis,"
Bulbous Bows in Smooth Water and in Waves," Journal of Hydronautics, Vol. 8.
SNAME  Transactions,  Vol. 63.	Garrison, C.J. (1975), "Hydrodynamics of Large Ob-


180	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


jects   in  the   Sea   Part   II:   Motion of  Free-Floating		Grim, O. (1959), "Die Schwingungen von Schwim- 
Bodies," Jou1-nal of  Hydronautics,   Vol. 9.	menden,	Zweidimensionalen   Korpern,"	Hamburg
Garrison,  C.J.  (1978),  "Hydrodynamic  Loading  of	Model Basin Report 1171.
Large Offshore Structures: Three-Dimensional Source Grim, O. (1963), "Surging Motion and Broaching 
Distribution Methods," Numerical  Methods  in  Off-  Tendencies in a Severe Irregular  Sea," Deutsche  Hy-  
shore Engineering.	drographischen Zeitschrifi, Vol. 16, No.5.
  Gatzoulis, J. and Keane, R.G. (1977), "Upgrading  Hadler, J.B., Lee, C.M.,Birmingham, J.T. and Jones, 
Mission Capability and Performance Effectiveness of H.D. (1974), "Ocean  Catamaran  Seakeeping  Design 
Naval Ships by the Use of Active Fin Stabilizers," Based on Experiences of  USNS  Hayes,"  SNAME 
Association of Scientists and Engineers, NAVSEA. Transactions, Vol. 82.
  Gerritsma, J. (1960), "Ship Motions in Longitudinal Hamlin, N.A., and Compton, R. (1966), "Assessment 
Waves," International Shipbuilding Progress, Vol. of Seakeepability," Marine Technology, Oct.
7, No. 66.			Hamlin, N.A. (1979), "Analysis of Ship Acceleration 
Gerritsma,  J., Bosch, J. van den, and Beukelman, W.	and Resultant Forces Resulting in Damage," Appendix 
(1961), "Propulsion  in Regular  and Irregular  Waves,"		C of Guidelines for Deck Stowage of Containers, J.J.
International	Shipbuilding   Progress,  Vol. 8, No. 82.	Henry Co., Inc.
  Gerritsma,  J. (1966), "Distribution of Hydrodynamic		Hasselmann, K. (1966), "On Non-linear Ship Mo- 
Forces  along  the  Length  of a Ship Model in Waves,"	tions in Irregular Waves," Journal of Ship Research, 
Report  No.  144, Technical University  of Delft, Neth-	Vol. 10, No. 1.
erlands.						Hasselmann, K., et al (1973), "Measurements of 
Gerritsma,  J.  (1980), "Results   of Recent Full Scale	wind-wave growth and swell decay during the Joint 
Seakeeping	Trials,"	International	Shipbuilding		North Sea Wave Project (JONSWAP)," Deutsche Hy-
Progress, Vol. 27.	drographischen Zeitschrift, A8, 12.
  Gerritsma, J.  and  Beukelman, W. (1966), "Compar-  Hasselmann,  K., et  al (1976), "A  Parametric  Wave 
ison of Calculated and Measured Heaving and Pitching Prediction Model," Journal of Physical Oceanogra- 
Motions of a Series 60, CB= .70 Ship Model in Regular phy, Vol. 6.
Longitudinal   Waves,"   Report No.  139, Netherlands		Havelock, T.H. (1945), "Notes on the Theory  of 
Ship Research  Center, Delft.	Heaving and Pitching," Trans. RINA, London.
  Gerritsma, J. and Smith, W.E., (1966). "Full Scale Himeno, Y.(1981), "Prediction of Ship Roll Damping 
Destroyer Motion Measurements," Report No. 142, - State of the Art," University of Michigan Report No. 
Netherlands Ship Research Center, Delft, (1967).Jour- 239.
nal  of Ship  Research,  Vol. 11, No. 1.	Hirsch,!.	(1967),  "On  the  Prediction  of  the  Sea-
  Gerritsma, J. and Beukelman, W. (1964), "The Dis- keeping Characteristics of Hydrofoil Ships," SNAME/ 
tribution of the  Hydrodynamic  Forces  on a Heaving	AIAA  Symposium on  Advanced  Marine  Vehicles. 
and Pitching  Ship Model in Still Water," Proceedings,		Hoffman, D. (1966), "Distribution of Wave Caused 
5th  Symposium  on  Naval Hydrodynamics, Washing-	Hydrodynamic Pressures and Forces on a Ship Hull 
ton, D.C.	in  Waves,"  Norwegian  Ship  Model Tank publication
Gerritsma, J. and Beukelman, W. (1965), "The Dis- 94, Trondheim.
tribution  of  the  Hydrodynamic  Forces  on a Heaving		Hoffman, D. and Maclean, W.M.(1970), "Ship Model 
and Pitching  Ship Model, with  Zero Forward Speed in	Study of Incidence of Shipping Water Forward," Ma- 
Still Water," Report No. 124, Netherlands Ship Re- rine Technology, April.
search Center, Delft.		Hoffman, D. and Miles, M. (1976), "Analysis of a 
Gerritsma,  J.  and Beukelman, W. (1967), "Analysis	Stratified Sample of Ocean Wave Records at Station
of  the   Modified Strip  Theory  for  the Calculation of	India," SNAME T and R Bulletin No. 1-35.
Ship  Motions  and  Wave  Bending Moments,"  Inter-		Hogben, N. and Lumb, F.E. (1967), Ocean Wave 
national   Shipbuilding   Progress,  Vol. 14, No. 156.	Statistics, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
  Gerritsma,  J.  and Beukelman, W. (1972), "Analysis     Hutchison, B.L. (1981), "Risk  and Operability Anal- 
of the Resistance Increase in Waves of a Fast Cargo ysis  in the  Marine  Environment,"  SNAME  Transac- 
Ship," International Shipbuilding Progress, Vol. 19. tions, Vol. 89.
  Gerritsma,  J.  (1976), "A  Note on the Application of			Hutchison, B.L., and Laible, D.H. (1987), "Concep- 
Ship Motion Theory,"  Schijfstechnik,  Vol. 23.		tual Design of a Medium-Endurance Research Vessel 
Goodman,  R.A.  (1971),  "Wave  Excited Main Hull	Optimized for Mission Flexibility and Seakeeping,"
Vibration in Large Bulk Carriers and Tankers," Trans.	Marine Technology, April.
RINA,  Vol. 113, London.			Ijima, T. (1957), "The Properties of Ocean Waves 
Gospodnetic,  D.,  and  Miles, M. (1974), "Some As-	on the Pacific Coast and the Japan Sea Coast of Japan," 
pects of the Average  Shape of Wave Spectra at Station		Report No. 25, Transportation Technical Research In-
India,"   Symposium  on  the  Dynamics  of Marine Ve-	stitute, Tokyo.
hides  and  Structures   in Waves, London.	Ikeda. Y., Himeno, Y., and Tanaka, N., (1978)"Com-


MOTIONS    IN  WAVES	181
ponents  of  Roll Damping  at  Forward Speed," Trans.	in Waves," Ship Structure Committee Report No. SSC- 
Japan  Society  of Naval  Architects, Vol 143.	231.
  Inglis, R.B. and Price, W.G. (1981), "A Three Di- Kaplan, P., Bentson, J., and Davis, S. (1981), "Dy- 
mensional Ship Motion Theory Comparison between namics and Hydrodynamics of Surface-Effect Ships," 
Theoretical Prediction and Experimental Data of the SNAME Transactions, Vol. 89.
Hydrodynamic    Coefficients  with  Forward   Speed,"	Kallstrom, C.G., Wessel, P. and Sjolander, S. (1988),
Trans.  RINA, Vol. 124.	"Roll Reduction by Rudder Control," SNAME Star 
INA  (1955), "The  Papers  of  William Froude,"  The	Symposium.
Institution   of Naval Architects,  London.			Kawashima, E., Sakao, M., and Tasaki, R (1959), 
ISO  (1978),  "Guide  for  the  Evaluation of Human	"On the External Force Acting on the Marine Reactor 
Exposure  to Whole-body Vibration," 2nd Edition. ISO-		Due to Ship Motion in Rough Sea," Journal of Zosen
2631.	Kiokai, No. 105.
ITTC, Report on Seakeeping Committee (1978), Pro-	Keane, RG., and Sandberg, W.C. (1984), "Naval
ceedings,  15th International  Towing Tank Conference.	Architecture for Combatants: a Technology Survey," 
ITTC (1979), (1981), Reports of the Seakeeping Com- Naval Engineers Journal, Sept.
mittees,  15th and 16th International  Towing Tank Con-		Kempf, G. (1934), "Effect of Pitching on Resistance 
ferences.	and   Propeller  Efficiency," Jahrbuch	der Schiffbau
Jackson,  F.C., Walton, W.T., and Baker, P.L. (1985),	Technische Gesellshaft.
"Aircraft and Satellite Measurement of Ocean Wave Kennell, C.G., White, B.L. and  Comstock,  E.N.  
Directional Spectra using Scanning-Beam Microwave (1985), "Innovative Naval Designs for North Atlantic 
Radars," Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 90. Operations," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 93.
  Jacobs, W.R  (1958), "The  Analytical Calculation of  Kerwin, J.E.  (1955), "Notes  on Rolling in Longitu-  
Ship Bending  Moments  in Regular  Waves,"  Journal   dinal Waves,"  International    Shipbuilding   Progress, 
of  Ship Research, June.	Vol. 2.
  Jacobs, W.R., Dalzell, J. and Lalangas,  P.  (1960),  Kimura,  A. (1980), "Statistical  Properties  of  Ran-  
"Guide to Computational Procedure for Analytical dom Wave Groups," Proceedings, 17th Conference  
Evaluation of Ship Bending-Moments in Regular Coastal Engineers, Vol. 3.
Waves," Davidson Laboratory  Report No. 791, Stevens		King, B.K. (1987), "Time-Domain Analysis of Wave 
Institute  of Technology.	Exciting Forces on Ships and Bodies," Ph.D. Thesis,
Jacobs,  W.R. and  Dalzell, J.F.  (1960), "Theory and	University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Experiment   in  the  Evaluation  of  Bending  Moments		King, B., Beck, R, and Magee (1988), "Seakeeping 
Acting  upon  a  Ship in Waves," International	Ship-	Calculations with Forward Speed Using Time-Domain 
building  Progress, September.		Analysis," Proceedings, 18th Symposium on Naval
Jensen,   J.J.,   and  Pedersen,   P.T. (1981), "Bending	Hydrodynamics, Delft, Netherlands.
Moments  and  Shear  Forces  in Ships Sailing in Irreg-		Korvin-Kroukovsky, B.V. (1955), "Investigation of 
ular  Waves,"  Journal   of  Ship Research, December.	Ship Motions in Regular Waves," SNAME Transac-
John,  F., (1950), "On  the Motion of Floating Bodies	tions, Vol. 63.
II,"  Communications	on  Pure  and Applied  Mathe-	Korvin-Kroukovsky, B.V., and Jacobs, W.R (1957),
matics,   Vol. 3, Interscience  Publishers,  New York.	"Pitching and Heaving Motions of a Ship in Regular 
Johnson,   RJ.    (1985),  "Hydrofoils,"  Naval  Engi-	Waves," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 65.
neers Journal,   Feb.	Korvin-Kroukovsky, B.V. (1961), Theory of Sea-
Joosen,  W.P.A. (1966), "Added  Resistance of Ships	keeping, SNAME, New York.
in  Waves,"  6th  Symposium  on  Naval Ship Hydrody-		Korvin-Kroukovsky, B.V. (1970), "Discussion of Sal- 
namics,  ONR, Washington, D.C.	vesen, et al."
  Journee, J.M.J. (1976a), "Motions, Resistance and Korvin-Kroukovsky, B.V. and Jacobs, W.R (1957), 
Propulsion of a Ship in Longitudinal Regular Waves," "Pitching  and  Heaving  Motions of a  Ship in Regular 
Delft University of Technology, Hydrodynamics Re- Waves," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 65.
port No. 428.		Krylov, A. (1898), "A New Theory of the Pitching 
Journee,  J.M.J. (1967b), "Motions and Resistance of	Motion of  Ships on  Waves,  and  of  the  Stresses Pro-
a  Ship in Regular  Following Waves,"  Delft Technical	duced by this Motion," Trans., INA, London. 
University,  Hydromechanics  Report No. 440.		Kumai, T., and Tasai,  F.  (1970), "On  the  Wave Ex-
Kaplan, P. (1966), "Lecture  Notes on Nonlinear The-	citing Force and Response  of Whipping of Ships," Eu-
ory  of  Ship Roll Motion in a  Random Seaway," Pro-	ropean Shipbuilding, Vol. 4.
ceedings,  International   Towing Tank Conference.		Kumai, T. (1972), "Wave-Induced Force Exciting 
Kaplan, P., and Sargent,  T.P. (1972), "Further  Stud-	Hull Vibration and Its Response," Trans. Society of
ies  of  Computer  Simulation  of  Slamming and Other	Naval Architects of West Japan.
Wave-Induced Vibratory  Structural  Loadings on Ships	Lackenby, H. (1978), "ITTC Dictionary of Ship Hy-


182	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


drodynamics,"  Maritime Technology Monograph  No.    Lewis, E.V. (1959), "Increasing   the  Sea  Speed of     
6, RINA, London.	Merchant Ships," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 67.
  Lalangas, P.A. (1964), "Application of Linear Su- Lewis, E.V., and Breslin, J.P. (1960), "Semi-sub- 
perposition Technique to the Roll Response of a Ship merged Ships  for  High-Speed  Operation  in  Rough 
Model in Irregular Beam Seas," Stevens Institute of Seas," 3rd ONR Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, 
Technology, Davidson  Laboratory Report 983.	Washington, D.C.
  Lamb,  Horace (1924), Hydrodynamics,	Cambridge		Lewis, E.V., and Numata, E. (1960), "Ship Motions 
University Press,  England.		in Oblique Seas," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 68.
  Lamb, G.R  (1975), "The  SWATH Concept; Design-		Lewis, F.M. (1929), "The Inertia of the Water Sur- 
ing Superior  Operability  into  a Surface Displacement	rounding a Vibrating Ship," SNAME Transactions, 
Ship,"  DTRC Report No. 4570.	Vol. 37.
  Lamb, G.R (1988), "Some Guidance for Hull Form Liapis, N. and Faltinsen, O. (1980), "Diffraction of 
Selection for SWATH Ships," Marine Technology, Oc- Waves Around a Ship," Journal of  Ship  Research, 
tober.	Vol 24, No.3.
  Landweber,  L. and  Macagno,  M.C. (1957), "Added		Liapis, S. and Beck, RF. (1985), "Seakeeping Com- 
Mass of Two Dimensional Forms  Oscillating in a Free	putations Using Time-DomainAnalysis," Proceedings, 
Surface,"  Journal   of Ship   Research,  Vol. 1, No.3.	Fourth International Conference on Numerical Ship
Landweber,  L. and  Macagno,  M.C. (1959), "Added	Hydrodynamics, Washington, D.C.
Mass of a Three Parameter  Family  of  Two-Dimen-  Lin, W.C., and  Reed, A.H.  (1976), "The  Second-Or- 
sional Forces  Oscillating in a Free  Surface,"  Journal   der  Steady  Force  and  Moments  on a  Ship Moving in 
of  Ship  Research,  Vol. 2, No.4.	an Oblique Seaway," 11th Symposium on Naval Hy-
Landweber,   L.  and   Macagno,  M. (1967), "Added	drodynamics, London.
Masses of Two-DimensionalForms by Conformal Map-			Lin, W.C., Day, W.G., Hough, J.J., Keane, RG., Wal- 
ping,"  Journal   of Ship  Research,  Vol. 11, No.2.		den, D.A., and Koh, I-Y, (1984), "An Advanced Meth- 
Landweber,  L. and  Macagno, M. (1975), "Accurate	odology for Preliminary Hull Form Development,"
Parametric   Representation   of  Ship Sections by Con-	Naval Engineers Journal, July.
formal Mapping," Proceedings, First International Lloyd, A.RJ.M., Brown, J.C.  and  Anslow, J.F.W.  
Conference on Numerical Ship Hydrodynamics, DTRC, (1979), "Motions and Loads on Ship Models in Regular 
Bethesda, Md.	Oblique Waves," Trans. RINA, Vol. 121, London.
  Lavis, D.R  (1972), "On  the  Prediction  of  Acceler-  Lloyd,  R.J.M.,  Salsich,  J.O.,  and   Zseleczky,  J.J. 
ation Response of Air Cushion Vehicles to Random (1985), "The Effect of Bow Shape on Deck Wetness 
Seaways," SNAME/ AIAA Symposium on Advanced in Head Seas," Trans. RINA, London.
Marine Vehicles.			Loeser, D.J., Yue, Dick K. and Salvesen, N. (1982), 
Lee, C.M., and Newman, J.N.  (1971), "The Vertical	"Slender-Body Calculations of Large-Amplitude Ship 
Mean Force  and  Moment of Submerged Bodies Under		Motions," Proceedings, 14th Symposium on Naval Hy- 
Waves,"  Journal   of  Ship  Research, Vol. 15.		drodynamics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Lee,  C.M., O'Dea,  J.F.,  and  Meyers,  W.G. (1982),	Mich.
"Prediction   of  Relative  Motion of  Ships in Waves,"		Lofft, RF., and Price, W.G. (1973) "Ocean Wave 
14th ONR Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Ann	Statistics-Frequency of Occurrence of Sea States," Ad- 
Arbor, Mich.	miralty Experiment Works, Haslar, England, No. 19. 
Lee, C.M., Curphey, RM.  (1977), "Prediction of Mo-	Longuet-Higgins, M.S. (1963), "The Effects of Non- 
tion,  Stability,  and  Load  of  Small-Waterplane-Area,	linearities on Statistical Distributions in the Theory of 
Twin-Hull Ships,"  SNAME Transactions,  Vol. 85.	Sea Waves," Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 17,
Lee, W.T., and  Bales,  S.L. (1984), "Environmental	Part 3.
Data  for  Design  of  Marine Vehicles," SSC/SNAME		Longuet-Higgins, M.S. (1984), "Statistical Proper- 
Symposium, Arlington, Va.	ties of Wave Groups in a Random Sea State," Philo-
  Lee, W.T., Bales, S., and Sowby, S.E. (1985), "Stan-	sophical Trans., Royal Society of London, Vol. 312. 
dardized  Wind and Wave Environments  for North Pa-		Longuet-Higgins, M.S., Cartwright, D.C., and Smith, 
cHicOcean Areas,"  DTRC Report SPD-0919-02.	N.P.  (1963),  "Observations   of  the  Directional Spec-
Lee,  Y.W. (1960), Statistical	Theory  of  Commu-	trum  of  Sea Waves  Using  the  Motions of  a Floating
nication,   John  Wiley and Sons, New York.	Buoy,"  Ocean  Wave Spectra,   Proceedings  ofa  Con-
  Leopold, R (1974), "Design-to-Cost of Naval Ships,"  ference,  Prentice-Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs, N.J. 
SNAME Transactions,   Vol. 82.	Loukakis,  T.A. (1970), "Computer  Aided Prediction
  Lewis,   E.V.   (1955),   "Ship   Speeds  in  Irregular	of Seakeeping Performance in Ship Design," Report 
Waves,"  SNAME Transactions,  Vol. 63.	No. 70-3, MIT, Cambridge, Mass.
  Lewis, E.V. (1958), "The Problem of Service Power Loukakis, T.A. and Chryssostomidis, C.  (1975), 
Margins," International Design and Equipment Num-  "Seakeeping  Standard Series for Cruiser-Stem  Ships," 
ber,  Shipbuilding    and Shipping  Record.	SNAME Transactions, Vol. 83.


MOTIONS IN WAVES	183


Mandel, P. (1960), "Subcritical and Supercritical Op- face Waves by Shear Flows," Parts I and II, Journal
eration of Ships in Waves and the Coincidenceof Max- of Fluid Mechanics, 3 and 6.
imum  Damping,"  Journal   of Ship Research, June.			Miller, E.R., Slager, J.J. and Webster, W.C. (1974), 
Mandel,  P.  (1979), "Seagoing   Box Scores and Sea-	"Phase I Report on the Development of a Technical 
keeping  Criteria  for Monohull, SWATH, Planing, Hy-		Practice for Roll Stabilization· System Selection,"
drofoil,	Surface	Effect	Ships   and	Air	Cushion	NAVSEA Report 6136-74-280.
Vehicles,"  DTRC Report SPD-79/ 1.	Milne-Thompson, L.M. (1960), Theoretical Hydro-
Mandel,  P.  and  Leopold,  R. (1966), "Optimization	dynamics, MacMillan Company, New York.
Methods  Applied to  Ship Design," SNAME Transac-	Mitsuyasu,  H.,  et  al  (1975),  "Observations   of the
tions,  Vol. 74.	Directional Spectrum of Ocean Waves Using a Clov- 
Mantle,  P.J.  (1976), "Cushions  and  Foils,"  SNAME   erleaf Buoy,"  Journal	of Physical Oceanography,
Spring Meeting, Philadelphia.	Vol. 5, No.4.
  Marks, W. and Ferdinande, V. (1960), "Effect of Sea Mockel, W.  (1!J53), "Seaworthiness  and  Safety  of 
State on Attainable  Ship  Speed  for  Some Mariner  Trawlers  in  a  Seaway,"  International  Fishing  Boat  
Class Ships," Davidson Laboratory Note No. 606. Congress, FAO of the United Nations, Rome.
  Martin,  M.  (1978),  "Theoretical   Prediction of Mo-		Moran, D.D., Fein, J.A., and Magnuson, A.H. (1974), 
tions  of  High-Speed Planing  Boats,"  Journal of Ship	"Dynamic Performance of an Air Cushion Vehicle in 
Research,  Sept.	a Marine Environment," AlAA/SNAME Symposium. 
Maruo, H. (1957), "The Excess Resistance  of a Ship	Moor and Luyster (1960), "Bow Freeboard" Trans.
in  Rough  Seas,"  International	Shipbuilding	Prog-	RINA, London.
ress, Vol. 4.	Moor, D.I. (1966), "Longitudinal Bending Moments 
Maruo, H. (1967), "Application of the Slender Body on Models in Head Seas," Trans. RINA, London.
Theory to the Longitudinal Motion of Ships among Moor, D.1. (1970), "Effects on Performances  in Still 
Waves," Bulletin of Faculty of Engineering,  Yoko-  Water  and Waves  of Some Geometric Changes  to the 
hama  National  University, Vol. 16.	Form of a Large Twin-Screw Ship," SNAME Trans-
Maruo, H. (1963), "Resistance in Waves, Researches	actions, Vol. 78.
into Seakeeping  Qualities  of Ships,"  Society of Naval			Moskowitz, L., Pierson, W.J. and Mehr, E. (1962, 
Architects  of Japan,  60th  Anniversary  Series, Vol. 8.		1963), "Wave Spectra Estimated from Wave Records 
Maruo, H. (1970), "An  Improvement  of the Slender	Obtained by the OWS Weather Explorer and OWS Body 
Theory  for  Oscillating Ships with Zero Forward		Weather Reporter," New York University, College of
Speed," Bulletin	of Faculty of Engineering, Yoko- Engineering.
hama  National  University, Vol. 19.			Moskowitz, L., Pierson, W.J., and Mehr, E. (1963), 
Maruo,  H.  and  Sasaki,  N.  (1974),  "On  the  Wave	"A Proposed Spectral Form for Fully Developed Wind 
Pressure Acting on the Surface of an Elongated Body Seas Based on the Similarity Theory of  S.A. Kitaigo- 
Fixed  in  Head  Seas,"  Journal    of  Society  of Naval		rodskii," Technical Report for U.S. Naval Oceano-
Architects   of Japan,  Vol. 136.	graphic Office, New York University.
  Maruo, H. and Tokura, J. (1978), "Prediction of Hy- Murdey, D.C. (1979), "Experiment Techniques for 
drodynamic Forces and Moments Acting on Ships in the Prediction of Ship Seakeeping Performance," Pro- 
Heaving and Pitching Oscillations by Means of an Im- ceedings, International Symposium on Marine Tech- 
provement of the Slender Ship Theory," Journal of nology, Trondheim, Norway.
Society   of  Naval  Architects   of Japan, Vol. 143.		Murdey, D.C., and Simoes Re, A.J. (1985), "The 
Matthews,  S.T. (1967), "Main  Hull Girder Loads on	NRC  Hull Form Series-an	Update,"  MARIN Work-
a Great  Lakes Bulk Carrier,"  SNAME Spring Meeting	shop  on  Hull  Form  Design,  Wageningen,   the Neth-
Proceedings.	erlands.
  Mays, J.H.  (1978), "Wave  Radiation and Diffraction   Nakamura,  S., and Fujii, H. (1977), "Nominal Speed 
by a Floating Slender Body," Ph.D. Thesis, Massachu- Loss of Ships in Waves," Symposium on Practical De- 
setts   Institute   of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.	sign in Shipbuilding (PRADS), Tokyo.
  McCreight, K.K., and Stahl, R.G. (1985), "Recent Nakamura, S., and Naito, S. (1977), "Propulsive Per- 
Advances in the Seakeeping Assessment of  Ships,"  formance  of a Container  Ship in Waves,"  Journal  of 
Naval  Engineers   Journal,  Vol. 97.	Society of Naval Architects of Japan.
  McCreight, K.K. (1987), "Assessing  the  Seaworthi-  NAVSEA  (1982),  "Minimum  Required  Freeboard 
ness of SWATH Ships,"  SNAME Transactions,  Vol.  for  U.S.  Naval  Surface  Ships,"  Design  Data  Sheet, 
95.	DDS-079-2.
  Meyers, W.G.,  Applebee,  T.R.  and  Baitis,  A.E.  NAVSEC (1975),  "Seakeeping  in  the  Ship Design 
(1981), "User's Manual for the Standard Ship Motion Process," Report of a Seakeeping Workshop, Annap- 
Program,  SMP,"  DTRC Report SPD-0936-01.	olis.
Miles, J.W. (1957,1959), "On the Generation  of Sur-	Nestegard, A. and Sclavounos, P. (1984), "A Nu-


184	PRINCIPLES  OF   NAVAL   ARCHITECTURE


merical   Solution   of   Two-Dimensional Deep  Water	actions,  Vol. 69.
Wave-Body  Problems,"   Journal    of Ship  Research,		Ochi, M.K. (1964), "Extreme Behavior of a Ship in 
Vol. 28.	Rough	Seas-Slamming	and Shipping of Green
Newman,   J.N.   and  Tuck,  E.O.  (1964),  "Current	Water," SNAME Transactions. Vol. 72.
Progress in the Slender Body Theory of Ship Motions," Ochi, M.K. and L.E. Motter (1973), "Prediction of 
Proceedings, 5th Symposium on Naval  Hydrodynam-  Slamming Characteristics  and Hull Responses for Ship 
ics, ONR, Washington, D.C.	Design," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 81.
  Newman,  J.N.  (1965),  "The  Exciting  Forces  on a		Ochi, M.K. (1973), "On Prediction of Extreme Val- 
Moving Body in  Waves,"  Journal   of Ship  Research,	ues," Journal of Ship Research, Vol. 17, No.!.
Vol. 9.		Ochi, M.K. and Bolton, W.E. (1973), "Statistics for 
Newman, J.N. (1967), "The Drift  Force and Moment	the Prediction of Ship Performance in a Seaway," In-
on  Ships in Waves,"  Journal   of  Ship Research, Vol.	ternational Shipbuilding Progress, Vol. 22.
11.	Ochi, M.K. (1974), "Review of Recent Progress in
  Newman, J.N. (1970), "Applications of Slender Body	Theoretical Prediction of Responses to Random Seas," 
Theory  in  Ship  Hydrodynamics,"  Annual  Review  of	SNAME T&R Symposium S-3.
Fluid  Mechanics,  Vol. 2.		Ochi, M.K., and Hubble, E.N. (1976), "On Six-Pa- 
Newman,  J.N.  (1974), "Second-order, Slowly Vary-	rameter Wave Spectra," Proceedings, 15th Coastal En-
ing  Forces  on  Vessels  in  Irregular  Waves,"  Sympo-	gineers Conference, ASCE, New York.
sium  on Dynamics  of Marine Vehicles and Structures			Ochi, M.K. and Bales, S.L. (1977), "Effect of Various 
in Waves, London.		Spectral Formulations in Predicting Responses of Ma- 
Newman,   J.N.   (1977),  Marine   Hydrodynamics,	rine Vehicles and Ocean Structures," Proceedings, Off-
Massachusetts    Institute   of  Technology Press,  Cam-	shore Technology Conference, Houston, Tex.
bridge, Mass.		Ochi, M.K. (1978), "Wave Statistics for the Design 
Newman,  J.N.  (1978),  "Theory  of  Ship Motions,"	of Ships and Ocean Structures," SNAME Transac-
Advances  in  Applied  Mechanics,  Vol. 18.	tions, Vol. 86.
  Newman, J.N.  and  Sclavounos, P. (1980), "The Un-		Ochi, M.K. (1986), "Non-Gaussian Random Proc- 
iiied Theory of Ship Motions," Proceedings, 13th Sym-	esses in Ocean Engineering," Probabilistic Engineer- 
posium  on Naval Hydrodynamics, Tokyo.	ing Mechanics, Vol. 1.
  Newton,  R.N.  (1960),  "Wetness   Related  to  Free-			O'Dea, J.F. (1983), "Wave Induced Mean Shift in 
board  and  Flare,"  Trans.  RINA, Vol. 102.		Vertical and Absolute Relative Motion," Proceedings, 
Nobless,  F. and McCarthy, J.H.  (1983), "Ship Wave	International Workshop on Ship and Platform Motions,
Resistance  Computations," Proceedings, David Taylor	Berkeley, Cal.
Research  Center  Workshop  on Ship Wave Resistance			O'Dea, J.F., and Walden, D.A. (1984), "Effect of 
Computations, Washington, D.C.		Bow Shape and Non-Linearities on the Prediction of 
Nordenstrom,   N.  (1969),  "Methods for  Predicting	Large Amplitude Motions and Deck Wetness," 15th 
Long-Term  Distributions  of  Wave  Loads and Proba-		ONR Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Hamburg. 
bility  of Failure  for  Ships, Appendix II, Relationships			Ogilvie, T.F. and Beck, R.F. (1973), "Transfer Func- 
Between   Visually   Estimated   and Theoretical  Wave		tions for Predicting Ship Motions: A Review of the
Heights  and  Periods,"  Det norske  Veritas Report No.	Theory," SNAME T&R Symposium S-3.
69-22-S,Oslo.			Ogilvie, T.F. (1964), "Recent Progress Toward the 
Numata, E., Michel,W.H., and McClure, A.C. (1976),	Understanding and Prediction of Ship Motions," Pro- 
"Assessment   of  Stability  Requirements for Semisub-		. ceedings, 5th Symposium Naval Hydrodynamics,
mersible  Units,"  SNAME  Transactions, Vol. 84.	ONR, Washington, D.C.
  Numata,  E.  (1980),  "Predicting Hydrodynamic Be-		Ogilvie, T.F. (1977), "Singular Perturbation Prob- 
havior  of  Small  Waterplane  Area, Twin-Hull Ships,"	lems in Ship Hydrodynamics," Advances in Applied 
SNAME Section paper, April.	Mechanics, Vol. 17.
  Oakley,   O.H.  (1960),   "High  Performance   Ships,		Ogilvie, T.F. and Shin, Y.S. (1978), "Integral-Equa- 
Promises  and  Problems,"  Third Symposium on Naval	tion Solutions for Time-Dependent Free Surface Prob- 
Hydrodynamics,  Office of  Naval Research, Washing-	lems," Trans., Society of Naval Architects of Japan. 
ton, D.C.		Ogilvie, T.F. and Tuck, E.O. (1969), "A Rational
  Oakley,  O.H., Paulling,  J.R.,  and  Wood, P. (1974),	Strip Theory for Ship Motions Part 1," Report No. 013, 
"Ship  Motions  and  Capsizing  in  Astern Seas,"  10th	University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Symposium on Naval  Hydrodynamics, ONR.	o 'Hanlon, J.F., and M.E. McCauley (1973), "Motion
  Oakley, O.H., Jr. (1974), "Directional Wave Spectra Sickness Incidence as a Function ofthe Frequency and 
Measurement and Analysis Systems," Proceedings, Acceleration of Vertical Sinusoidal  Motion,"  Human 
SNAME T&R Symposium S-3.	Factors Research, Inc. Technical Memorandum 1973-
Ochi, M.K.  (1961),  "Hydroelastic   Study  of a Ship	1.
Equipped  with  an Antipitching  Fin," SNAME Trans-	Ohmatsu. S. (1975), "On the Irregular Frequencies


MOTIONS IN WAVES	185

in the  Theory of Oscillating Bodies in a Free Surface,"	Rice, O. (1944-45),  "Mathematical  Analyses of Ran-
Papers  of  Ship  Research  Institute   of Japan,  No. 48.	dom Noise," Bell System Technical Journal, Vols. 23, 
Olson,  S.R.  (1977),  "A   Seakeeping Evaluation  of	24.
Four  Naval Monohulls and a 3,250 ton SWATH," Cen-			Roll, H.U. (1958), "Height, Length and Steepness 
ter  for  Naval  Analysis Memorandum 77-0640.			of Seawaves in the North Atlantic," and "Dimensions 
Papanikolaou,	A.	(1980),   "Schwingungen	von	of Seawaves as Functions of Wind Force," Translation
Schwimmenden  Zylindern,"  Schiffstechnik,  Bd. 27.	by M. St. Denis, SNAME T&R Bulletin, No. 1-19.
  Paulling,  J.R   (1961),  "The  Transverse Stability of		Rydill, L.J. (1959), "A Linear Theory for the Steered 
a Ship in Longitudinal  Seaway,",  Journal   of Ship Re-	Motion of Ships in Waves," Trans. RINA, London. 
search,  March.		Salvesen, N. and Smith, W.E. (1969), "Comparison
  Paulling, J.R and Richardson, RK. (1962), "Mea- of Ship Motion Theory and Experiment for Mariner  
surement of Pressures, Forces and Radiating Waves Hull," Technical Note 104, DTRC, Bethesda, Md.
for  Cylinders  Oscillating  in a  Free Surface,"  Univer-			Salvesen, N. and Smith, W.E. (1971), "Comparison 
sity  of California, Berkeley,  Series 82,  Issue 23.		of Ship-Motion and Experiment for Mariner Hull and 
Paulling,  J.R,   and  Wood, P.D. (1974), "Numerical	a Destroyer Hull with Bow Modification," Report No.
Simulation of Large-Amplitude Ship Motions in Astern	3337, DTRC, Bethesda, Md.
Seas,"  SNAME T&R Symposium S-3.		Salvesen, N., Tuck, E.O. and Faltinsen, O. (1970), 
Payne,  P.R   (1974),  "Supercritical  Planing Hulls,"	"Ship Motions and Sea Loads," SNAME Transac-
AIAA/SNAME	Symposium on Advanced Marine Ve-	tions, Vol. 78.
hicles, Feb.			Salvesen, N. (1974), "Second-order Steady-State 
Payne,  P.R.  (1978),  "On  Quantizing Ride Comfort	Forces and Moments on Surface Ships in Oblique Reg- 
and   Allowable  Accelerations,"  AIAA-SNAME Sym-		ular Waves," Symposium on Dynamics of Marine Ve-
posium  on Advanced Marine Vehicles.	hicles and Structures in Waves, London.
  Phillips, O.M. (1957), "On the  Generation of Waves    Salvesen, N. (1978a), "Added Resistance  in Waves," 
by Turbulent Wind," Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Journal of Hydronautics, Vol. 12, January.
Vol. 2, part  5.		Salvesen, N. (1978b), "Ship motions in Large 
Phillips,  O.M. (1966),  The Dynamics   of the Upper	Waves," Proceedings, Symposium on Applied Mathe-
Ocean,  Cambridge  University Press,  England.	matics, Delft.
Pierson, W.J., Neumann,  G. and James, RW. (1955),	Saunders, H.E. (1965), Hydrodynamics in Ship De-
"Practical    Methods  for   Observing and  Forecasting	sign, Author's Notes, Vol. III, SNAME.
Ocean Waves by Means  of Wave Spe~tra and  Statis-  Savitsky,  D.  (1968), "On  the  Seakeeping  Perform- 
tics," H.O. Publication 603, U.S. Navy Hydrographic ance of Planing Hulls,"  Marine  Technology,  Vol. 5, 
Office, Washington,  D.C.	No.2.
  Pierson,   W.J.  and  Moskowitz,  L.  (1964), "A  Pro-		Savitsky, D. and Brown, P.W. (1976), "Procedures 
posed  Spectral  Form  for  Fully Developed Wind Seas	for Hydrodynamic Evaluation of Planing Hulls in 
Based on the Similarity Theory of S.A. Kitaigorodskii,"	Smooth and Rough Water," Marine Technology, Vol. 
Journal   of  Geophysical  Research, Vol. 69.	13, No.4.
  Pierson,  W.J.  (1974),  "Forecasting  and Observing		Sayer, P. and Ursell, F. (1977), "Integral-Equation 
Waves, Winds and Weather  at Sea," SNAME Technical	Methods for Calculating the Virtual Mass in Water of 
and  Research Symposium S-3.	Finite Depth," Proceedings, Conference on Numerical
  Pierson, W.J. (1982), "The Spectral Ocean Wave Ship Hydrodynamics,  University  of California, Berke- 
Model (SOWM) ...  ,"  DTRC Report 82/011.	ley.
  Pinkster,  J.A.  (1980), "Low  Frequency  Second Or-  Schmitke,  RS.   (1978),  "Ship  Sway,  Roll and  Yaw 
der Wave Exciting Forces on Floating Structures," Motions in Oblique Seas," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 
MARIN  Pub. 650, Wageningen.	86.
  Porter,  W.R  (1960), "Pressure  Distributions, Added  Schmitke,  RT.,  and  Murdey,  D.C.  (1980),  "Sea- 
Mass and Damping Coefficients for Cylinders Oscil- keeping Resistance  Trade-Offs in  Frigate  Hull  Form 
lating in a Free Surface," University of California, Design," 13th ONR Symposium on  Naval  Hydrody- 
Berkeley, Report, 82-16.	namics, Tokyo.
  Potash, R.L. (1971), "Second-Order Theory of Os- Sclavounos, P. (1984), "The Diffraction of Free-Sur- 
cillating Cylinders,"  Journal  of Ship  Research,  Vol.  face  Waves by  a  Slender  Ship," Journal  of Ship  Re- 
15, Number 4.	search, Vol. 28, No. 1.
  Price, W.G. and Bishop, RE.D. (1974), Probabilistic Sclavounos, P. (1985), The  Unified  Slender-Body 
Theory of Ship Dynamics, Chapman  and  Hall,  Lon-  Theory:  Ship Motions in Waves,"  Proceedings,  Sym- 
don.	posium Naval Hydrodynamics, University of Michigan,
Research   Panel  (1980),  "Winds  and  Waves of the	Ann Arbor.
N?rth   Pacific Ocean,"  Shipbuilding Research Associ-		Sellars, F. (1983), Memo to Panel H-7, "Seakeeping 
atlOn of Japan.	Design Procedure," Oct. (unpublished).


186	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


  Sellars,  F.H.  and  Setterstrom,   C.R. (1987), "Anal-		Szebehely, V.G. (1955), "Ship Slamming in Head 
ysis  of  Effects of Seakeeping  on Ship Operating Eco-	Seas," DTRC Report 913.
nomics,"  SNAME Ship  Operations, Management  and			Takagi, M., Arai, S.-I., Takezawa, S., Tanaka, K. and 
Economics Symposium, Kings Point, N.Y.		Takarada, N. (1985), "A Comparison of Methods for 
Simoes Re, A.J.  (1986), unpublished communication	Calculating the Motion of a Semi-Submersible," Ocean
to the Editor.	Engineering, Vol. 12, No. 1.
  Smith, W.E. (1883), "Hogging   and Sagging Strains			Tasai, F. (1959), "On the Damping Force and Added 
in a Seaway as Influenced by Wave Structure,"  Trans.		Mass of Ships Heaving and Pitching," Journal of So- 
INA, Vol. 24.		ciety of Naval Architects of Japan, Vol. 105, Trans- 
Smith, W.E. and  Salvesen,  N. (1969), "Comparison	lation published by University of California, Berkeley. of  
Ship  Motion and  Experiment  for  Davidson A De-			Tasai,  F.  (1966),  "An  Approximate  Calculation of
stroyer  Form,"  Technical Note  102, DTRC, Bethesda,		Hydrodynamic Pressure on the Midship Section Con- 
Md.		tour of a Ship Heaving and Pitching in Regular Head 
Smith,  W.E. and  Salveson, N. (1970), "Comparison	Waves," Reports of Research Institute for Applied
of Ship Motion Theory  and  Experiment for Destroyer	Mechanics, Kyushu University, Japan.
with Large  Bulb," Journal   of Ship  Research, Vol. 14,		Tasai, F. et al (1973), "Model Experiments and The- 
No. 1.	oretical Calculations in Waves on a High-Speed Con-
  Soeding, H. (1969), "Eine  Modifikation der Streifen-	tainership with Triple Screws," Journal, Society of 
methode,"  Schijfstechnik,   Bd. 16, Heft 80.	Naval Architects of Japan.
  St. Denis, M. and Pierson,  W.J. (1953), "On the Mo-			Tasaki, R. (1963), "On the Shipping of Water  in 
tions of Ships in Confused Seas," SNAME Transac-		Head Waves," Trans. Society of Naval Architects of 
tions,  Vol. 61.		Japan, Vol. 107 (in  Japanese).  Also Proceedings  of 
St.  Denis,  M.  (1976),  "On  the Environmental  Op-	10th ITTC, London (1963) and 60th Anniversary Series
erability of Seagoing Systems,"  SNAME T&R Bulletin	of SNA of Japan (in English).
No. 1-32.		Taylor, K.V. and Lundgren, J. (1976), "Full  Scale 
St. Denis, M. (1980), "On  the Statistical Description	Static and Dynamic Measurements on MV Nihon,"
of  Seaways   of  Moderate   Severity," SNAME STAR	The Naval Architect, March.
Symposium.			Tick, L.J. (1958), "Certain Probabilities Associated 
St.  Denis,  M. (1980), "Some  Comments on Certain	with Bow Submergence and Ship Slamming in Irreg- 
Idealized  Variance  Spectra  of  the Seaway Currently		ular Seas," Journal  of Ship  Research,  Vol. 2, No. 1. 
in  Fashion,"  Journal   of  Ship Research, December.			Timman, R. and Newman, J.N. (1962), "The Coupled
St.  Denis,  M.  (1983),  "On  the  Empiric Design  of	Damping Coefficients of Symmetric Ships," Journal
Seakindly   Ships,"   2nd  International  Symposium on	of Ship Research, Vol. 5, No.4.
Practical  Design  in Shipbuilding (PRADS), Tokyo.	Troesch, A.W. (1976), "The Diffraction Potential for 
Stability '81 (1981) Proceedings of a Symposium. a Slender Ship Moving through Oblique Waves," Ph.D. 
Stark, D.A. (1977), "Hydrofoil Control and Dynam- Thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
ics   Criteria  (Technical  Substantiation),"	Vol.  IlIA		Troesch, A.W. (1979), "The Diffraction Forces for 
Boeing  Marine  Systems  Report BMS D321-51313-2.	a Ship Moving in Oblique Seas," Journal of Ship Re-
Stavovy, A.B. and Chuang,  S.L. (1976), "Analytical	search, Vol. 23, No.2.
Determination of Slamming Pressures for High-Speed Troesch, A.W. (1981a), "Sway, Roll, and Yaw Mo- 
Vehicles in Waves," Journal of Ship Research, De- tion Coefficients Based on  a  Forward  Speed  Slender 
cember.	Body Theory - Part 1," Journal of Ship Research, Vol.
Stefun,  G.P.  (1958),  "The  Influence  of Ship Form	25, No. 1.
on Pitch  and Heave Amplitudes,"  DTRC Report 1235.		Troesch, A.W. (1981b), "Sway, Roll, and Yaw Mo- 
Stokes,  G.G. (1847), "On  the  Theory of Oscillatory	tion Coefficients Based on a Forward Speed Slender 
Waves,"  Trans.  Cambridge Philosophic Society.		Body Theory - Part 2," Journal of Ship Research, Vol.
Strom-Tejsen,   J.   Yeh,   H.Y.H.   and Moran,  D.D.	25, No. 1.
(1973), "Added Resistance  in Waves," SNAME Trans-	Troesch,  A.W. (1984a), "Wave-Induced  Hull Vibra-
actions,  Vol. 81.	tions: an  Experimental  and  Theoretical  Study," Jour-
Swaan,  W.A., and  Vossers,  G. (1961), "The Effect	nal of Ship Research, June.
of   Forebody   Section   Shape   on   Ship Behavior  in		Troesch, A.W. (1984b), "Effects of Nonlinearities on 
Waves,"  Trans.  RINA, Vol. 103.	Hull Springing," Marine Technology, Oct.
  Swaan, W.A. (1961), "The  Influence ofthe  Principal		Troesch, A.W. and Kang, C.G. (1986), "16th Sym- 
Dimensions  on  Ship  Behavior  in Irregular   Waves,"	posium on Naval Hydrodynamics, Berkeley, CA. 
International	Shipbuilding    Progress, Vol. 8.		Tsai, F. and Takaki, M. (1969), "Theory and Cal-
  Swaan, W.A., and Rijken, H. (1964), "Speed Loss at  culation  of  Ship  Responses  in  Regular  Waves,"  (in 
Sea as a Function of Longitudinal Weight  Distribu-  Japanese),  Symposium, Seaworthiness  of  Ships, Soci- 
tion,"  Trans.  NECIES.	ety of Naval Architects of Japan.


MOTIONS    IN  W AYES	187


Tucker, M.J. (1956), "A Shipborne Wave Recorder,"	ternational   Shipbuilding	Progress, Vol. 16.
Trans.  RINA, Vol. 98.		Wachnik, Z.G., and Pierce, RD. (1967), "SR.N4 Mo- 
Tukey, J.W. (1949), "The Sampling Theory of Power	tions," DTRC Report.
Spectrum Estimates," Symposium on Applications of Wahab, R (1966), "Research on Bulbous Bow 
Autocorrelation Analysis to Physical Problems, ONR, Ships," Part  1.B, International  Shipbuilding  Prog-  
Woods Hole, Mass.	ress, Vol. 13.
  Ursell, F. (1949), "On  the Heaving Motion of a Cir-  Walden,  H.  (1964),  "Die  Eigenschaften  der  Meer- 
cular Cylinder on the Surface of a Fluid," Quarterly swellen im Nordatlantischen Ozean," Deutscher  Wet- 
Journal   of Applied   Mathematics,  Vol. 2.	terdienst, No. 41, Hamburg.
  Ursell, F., "Wave Generation by Wind," Surveys in Wang, S. (1976), "Dynamical Theory of Potential 
Mechanics, pp. 216-249, G.K. Batchelor and RM. Dav-  Flows  with  a  Free  Surface,"  Journal   of  Ship   Re- 
ies,  Cambridge  University Press,  England.	search, Vol. 20, No.3.
  U.S. Navy (1983), "Hindcast Spectral Ocean Wave Watanabe,  Y., Inoue,  S., and  Murahashi,  T. (1964), 
Model Climatology Atlas: North Atlantic," Naval "The Modification of Rolling Resistance for  Full 
Oceanography Command, Asheville, N.C., NAVAIR Ships," Trans. West-Japan SNA (in Japanese).
50-1C-538.	Webster, W.C. (1967), "Analysis of the Control of
U.S. Navy  (1985), "Hindcast   Spectral Ocean Wave	Activated Antiroll Tanks," SNAME Transactions,
Model Climatology Atlas: North Pacific," Naval Ocean-	Vol. 75.
ography   Command, Asheville,  N.C., NAVAIR 50-1C-	Wehausen,   J.V.  (1971),  "The   Motion  of Floating
539.	Bodies," Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 3. 
Van  Sluijs,  M.F., and  Tan,  S.G. (1972), "Behavior		Wiener,  N.  (1930),  "Generalized   Harmonic Analy-
and  Performance  of Compact Frigates  in Head Seas,"	sis," Acta Mathematics, Vol. 55.
International	Shipbuilding    Progress, Vol. 19.	Wiener,  N.  (1949), The Extrapolation,	Interpola-
  Vassilopoulos, L.A. (1966), "The Application of Sta- tion and Smoothing of Stationary Time Series, John 
tistical Theory of Non-linear Systems to Ship Perform- Wiley & Sons, New York.
ance	in   Random	Seas,"	Ship   Control   Systems			Yamanouchi, Y. (1964), "On Some Remarks on the 
Symposium, Annapolis, November.		Statistical	Estimation	of   Response   Functions	of 
Vassilopoulous,   L.  (1971),  "Ship   Rolling at  Zero	Ships," Fifth Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics,
Speed in Random Beam Seas with Nonlinear Damping	Bergen, Norway.
and  Restoration,"  Journal   of Ship  Research, Vol. 15.		Yamanouchi, Y. and Ogawa, A. (1970), "Statistical 
Vasta,  J., Giddings, A.J., Taplin, A: and Stilwell, J.J.	Diagrams  on the  Winds  and Waves  on the  North Pa-
(1961),   "Roll    Stabilization   by   Means  of  Passive	cific Ocean," Ship  Research  Institute,  Tokyo. 
Tanks,"   SNAME  Transactions, Vol. 69.		Yeung,  RW.   (1975) "A  Hybrid  Integral  Equation
  Von Kerczek, C. and Tuck, E.O. (1969), "The  Rep-  Method for  Time-harmonic Free-surface  Flow,"  First  
res entation of Ship Hulls by Conformal Mapping Func- International Conference on Numerical Ship Hydro- 
tions,"  Journal   of  Ship  Research,  Vol. 13, No.4.	dynamics, DTRC, Washington, D.C.
  Vossers, G., and Swaan, W.A. (1960), "Some Sea- Yeung, R.W. (1982), "Numerical  Methods in  Free-  
keeping Tests with a Victory Model," International Surface Flows," Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 
Shipbuilding   Progress.	Vol. 14.
  Vossers, G., Swaan, W.A., and Rijken, H. (1960), Yeung, R.W. and Kim, SoH. (1981), "Radiation 
"Experiments with Series 60 Models in Waves,"  Forces  on  Ships  with  Forward  Speed,"  Proceedings, 
SNAME  Transactions,  Vol. 68.	Third International Conference on Numerical Ship Hy-
Vossers,  G. (1962),  "Behavior  of  Ships in Waves,"	drodynamics, Paris.
Resistance,   Propulsion    and  Steering   of Ships,  Vol.		Yeung, RW. and Kim, S.H. (1985). "A New Devel- 
C; H.  Starn  N.V., Haarlem, the Netherlands.	opment in the Theory of Oscillating and Translating
  Vughts, J.H. (1968), "The Hydrodynamic Coeffi-  Slender Ships," Proceedings,  Fifteenth  Symposium on 
cients for Swaying, Heaving and Rolling Cylinders in Naval Hydrodynamics, Hamburg.
a  Free  Surface,"  International	Shipbuilding	Prog-			Yeung, RW. (1975), "A Hybrid Integral Equation 
ress, Vol. 15.				Method from Time-Harmonic Free-Surface Flow", Pro- 
Vugts,  J .H. (1969), "A  Comparative  Study on Four	ceedings, First International Conference on Numerical
Different  Passive  Roll Damping  Tanks  (Part II)," In-	Ship Hydrodynamics, Washington D.C. pp 581-608.


188	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE







  Nomenclature 
Motions	in Waves





NOMENCLATURE  MOTION  IN WAVES	189



m	moment, generally; also mass of ob- 
ject in or on ship
mn	spectral moments  of area  under S(w)
subscript  indicating 0-4th moments
N, n	number of cycles of response
,n	two-dimensional and generalized unit 
normals
01	operability index
P,p	probability; fluid pressure; power
pj	pseudo-spectrum (directional) of re- 
sponse
P.	probability of a given sea state
Pu probability of a given ship-wave head- 
ing
Pv probability of a given ship speed
Pi	probability of a ship being operable









TED

Uo Ve
V
WP



visually estimated wave period period of a regular wave
average period between zero up­ crossings (wave record)
average period of component  waves in a seaway
period corresponding to average fre­ quency of component 
waves
ship's natural period of oscillation in jth mode
Twenty-ft Equivalent Unit (cargo con- tainers)
forward velocity of ship (or 11) wave velocity or celerity 
dummy variable
waterplane


at a given speed and heading in a 
given sea state
R	resistance; radius
r	segment radius
r	= (x, y, z) the position vector of point
(x,  y, z)
RAO	Response Amplitude Operator
RBM Relative Bow Motion, vertically, be- 
tween a point at the bow and the 
wave surface
RFR Required Freight Rate for even trade- 
off between estimated expenses and 
revenues
s	area, in general
S'	underwater hull surface area


Coordinates of Axis Systems
x, y, z	moving with same velocity as the ship
(inertial coordinates)
Xo, Yo. z0,	fixed  in  relation  to  the  earth,  with x0
axis set in direction of travel of ship
x, y, z fixed in the ship (body axes)
x	distance from origin along X-axis, normal 
to y, z
y	distance from origin along Y-axis, normal to 
x, z
z	distance from origin along Z-axis, nor­ mal 
to x, y
Greek Symbols


S((I))	wave spectrum (as a function of fre- 
quency)
S,((I))	wave spectrum at a point
s,.<(I)> wave slope spectrum at a point
Si(I))	response spectrum in j-mode as a 
function of (I)
S/(l)c)	response spectrum in j-mode as a 
function of (l)c
 SOE	Seakeeping Operability Envelope SPI-
1	Seakeeping Performance Index; tran­
sit speed
SPI-2	Seakeeping Performance Index; mis­ 
sion effectiveness
s  relative  bow  motion  (RBM) between 
a point on the bow and the water 
surface (scalar value of R at FP)
s	amplitude of relative bow motion
T	wave period; draft
Tc average period between peaks (or hol­ 
lows) of wave record
T.	period of wave encounter
T1	still-water draft forward
Tm	modal wave period; period corre­ 
sponding to peak of S((I))


a (alpha)
p• (Beta)
-y* (gamma)
/l
!l.1k (Delta)
6 (delta)
6R
6P
E (epsilon)

{ (zeta2
r
21rVLw


{o
111 (eta)


angle, generally; confidence level pa- rameter (Ochi)
non-dimensional roll damping ratio non-dimensional roll 
restoring force mass displacement
mass components of generalized in- ertia matrix of ship
a finite increment; 6R rudder angle added resistance in 
waves
added power in waves
phase angle; spectral broadness pa- rameter
wave surface elevation wave amplitude
wave slope
wave	slope   amplitude	(maximum value
local wave surface elevation at a point in ship
surface wave profile
complex response of ship to waves in jth mode, where  j  =  1, 
2, 3,	6
refers to surge, sway, heave, roll, pitch, yaw, respectively


190	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE









8 (Theta)


complex 
amplitude 
of ship  
response 
to waves 
in jth 
mode; 
response 
per unit 
wave 
amplitude
scalar 
amplitude of 
ship 
response
= (711, 
712, 11a) 
vector of 
translation
al motions 
at the 
origin in 
terms of 
complex 
amplitude
s
angle 
generally


.
:
:
.
D
 
n
o
n
-
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
l
 
l
a
r
g
e
s
t
 
m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
e
x
­
 
p
e
c
t
e
d
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
e
x
c
e
e
d
e
d
 
i
n
 
1
/
 
a
 
s
a
m
­
 
p
l
e
s
 
o
f
 
D
 
s
e
c
.
 
d
u
r
a
t
i
o
n
E
 
n
o
n
-
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
l
 
l
a
r
g
e
s
t
 
m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
e
x
­
 
p
e
c
t
e
d
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
e
x
c
e
e
d
e
d
 
o
n
c
e
 
i
n
 
1
/
 
a
 
s
a
m
p
l
e
s
 
o
f
 
n
 
m
a
x
i
m
a
I
l
'
w
     
(
P
i
)
	
n
o
n
-
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
l
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
a
d
d
e
d
 
p
o
w
e
r


A (Lambda)
µ (mu)

/J,a





/J,o


tuning 
factor, 
Tn/T. = w.f 
Wni
angle of 
wave 
propagati
on 
relative to 
ship's 
heading
dominant 
direction 
of 
propagati
on of 
short-
crested 
sea 
relative to 
ship's 
heading
angle of 
propagatio
n of wave 
com­ 
ponent 
relative to 
dominant 
wave 
direction
angle of 
long-
crested 
sea 
relative to 
ship's 
heading


p (rho)
<I> (Phi)
'PK
<I>
cf>
l/Ji (psi)
n (Omega)

w (omega)


density
ve
lo
cit
y 
po
te
nti
al, 
al
so 
<f
, 
(p
hi
) 
ra
di
ati
on 
po
te
nti
al
angle of heel 
(or roll)
velocity of 
roll
two-
dimensional 
velocity 
potential
=
 
(
1
1
,
,
 
'
1
}
5
 
,
 
'
1
}
6
 
)
 
v
e
c
t
o
r
 
o
f
 
r
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
m
o
­
 
t
i
o
n
 
a
t
 
a
 
p
o
i
n
t
 
i
n
 
t
e
r
m
s
 
o
f
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
x
 
a
m
p
l
i
t
u
d
e
s
cir
c
u
l
a
r
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
 
o
f
 
a
 
r
e
g
u
l
a
r
 
w
a
v
e
;
 
a
n
g
u
l
a
r
 
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y


local  translational  motion  at  a point
in surge, sway,  heave (as in Section
5)
      complex amplitudes of local motion at 
a point
= (t,	2 ,	vector of translational


•	frequency of encounter (27T / T.)
tuning factor (w.lwJ, also A
      natural frequency of 
response (in jth
mode)
Mathematical symbols



e (xi)


E (Xi)
  

motion at 
a  point in a  
ship 
complex 
amplitude 
of vertical 
motion
relative to 
the wave 
surface
magnitude 
of a 
maximum 
o-mean 
process; 
peak-to-
mean 
value of 
wave or 
response 
record
largest 
positive 
maximum 
in a 
sample of 
n maxima
= I-JJl"o 
normalize
d maxima 
of an o­ 
mean 
process
= eI 2Mn 
non-
dimensional 
largest


a 
the 
part
ial 
deri
vati
ve 
sig
n
.
F
 
a
 
f
u
n
c
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
s
u
m
m
a
t
i
o
n
m
a
s
s
 
d
i
s
p
l
a
c
e
m
e
n
t
 
v
o
l
u
m
e
6
	
i
n
c
r
e
m
e
n
t
 
i
n
t
e
g
r
a
t
e
( ) 
avera
ge 
value 
of
V
	
v
e
c
t
o
r
 
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
i
a
l
 
o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
 
o
n
 
a
 
f
u
n
c
­
 
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
r
e
e
 
v
a
r
i
a
b
l
e
s
m
i
d
-
l
e
n
g
t
h
 
(
a
m
i
d
s
h
i
p
s
)


maximum in a sample of n maxima	See also list on page 420.


 










 Section 1 
Introduction
  1.1  Definition  and   Scope.   Controllability  encom-   characteristics   of earlier  successful  designs.  In other 
passes all aspects of  regulating  a  ship's  trajectory,  cases,  experimental  techniques,  theoretical  analyses, 
speed, and orientation at sea as well as in restricted  and  rational  design  practices  must  all come into play 
waters where positioning and station keeping are of to assure adequacy.
particular concern. Controllability includes  starting,  Three  tasks  are  generally  involved in  producing  a 
steering a steady course, turning, slowing, stopping, ship with good controllability:
backing,  and  in  the  case  of  submarines,  diving. The  (a)  Establishing  realistic  specifications and criteria 
study of the complex subject  of controllability is usu-  for coursekeeping,  maneuvering,  and speed changing.  
ally  divided into  three  distinct  areas or functions:	(b) Designing the hull, control surfaces, appen-
  (a)	Coursekeeping (or steering)-The   maintenance    dages,   steering   gear,   and  control  systems   to  meet 
of a steady  mean course  or heading.  I:Q.terestcenters  these  requirements   and predicting  the  resultant  per-   
on the ease with which the ship can be held to the formance.
course.	(c) Conducting full-scale trials to measure perform-
  (b)	Maneuvering-The controlled change in the di- ance for comparison with required criteria and predic- 
rection of motion (turning or course changing). Inter- tions.
est centers on the ease with which change can be This chapter will deal with each of these three tasks 
accomplished and the radius and distance required to in detail.
accomplish the change.	1.2	Goal   and   Organization	of   the   Chapter.	The
  (c)	Speed  Changing-The	controlled  change   in	goal of this chapter is to introduce the basics of con- 
speed including stopping  and backing. Interest  centers	trollability analysis and its many  facets  in a  manner 
on  the  ease,  rapidity  and  distance  covered in accom-	that will lead to the use of rational design procedures 
plishing changes.		to assure adequate ship controllability.
  Performance   varies  with  water,  depth, channel re-		The chapter is organized to provide an understand- 
strictions,  and hydrodynamic interference from nearby	ing of controllability and for influencing it while in- 
vessels  or  obstacles.  Coursekeeping and maneuvering	teracting	with    the    design    of the   vessel's	hull, 
characteristics   are  particularly  sensitive  to ship trim.	machinery, and other  features.  The  material  is  ar- 
For  conventional  ships,  the  two  qualities  of course-	ranged to provide a progression of information start- 
keeping  and  maneuvering  may  tend  to work against	ing with general principles (Sections 2 through 11 on 
each  other;  an  easy  turning   ship  may  be difficult to	theory and analysis), the influences of factors such as 
keep on course  whereas  a ship which maintains course	environment and channel restrictions (Sections 12 and 
well may be hard  to turn.  Fortunately  a practical com-	13),the hydrodynamics of control surfaces (Section 14), 
promise  is  nearly always possible.	and trials and performance requirements (Section 15).
  Since controllability is so important, it is an essential The final Sections (16 and 17) provide an introduction 
consideration in the design of any floating structure. to the application of maneuverability analysis tools and 
Controllability is, however, but one of many consid- methods to the  design  of the  ship and its appendages 
erations facing the naval architect and involves com- for satisfactory control by the helmsman and autopilot. 
promises with other important characteristics. Some The design-oriented naval architect  should  find Sec- 
solutions are obtained through comparison with the tions 15-17 most helpful.


192	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


Section 2
The Control Loop and Basic Equations of Motion
  	The Control Loop. For surface ships,  course-  In  the  real  case,  all of the  information  concerning keeping, 
speed changing, and maneuvering involve pri- the actual instantaneous path is rarely known. On most marily 
forces, moments, and motions acting in all  ships only the  heading and sometimes the rate  of turn directions in the 
horizontal plane. For submarines, the  are  continuously  determinable,  while the  coordinates third dimension also 
comes into play. Hydrodynamic of position are available only occasionally. In  spite of motion forces and 
interactions  acting  on the  vessel's  the  shortcomings  of the real case, the control loop still hull, rudder, and other 
appendages are of first con- functions as shown in Fig. 1 but with  less  than  com- sideration and difficulty. 
However, it is important to plete information available to the conning officer and recognize  that   the  responses   
of  a  large   number  of   helmsman   (or   autopilot).   Relatively   large-scale other mechanical, electronic, 
environmental and, most changes in position are determined or deduced in re- importantly, human factors all  
influence  controllabil-  stricted  water  conditions  from  visual  observations,  a ity.  The  following  discussion  of  
controllability  based  radar  display, or from visual  cross  bearings.  Modem on the concept of control loops 
illustrates the  role  of  electronic  navigation  systems  such  as  Loran  C and  these  many factors.	Global 
Positioning System (GPS) also offer a means
Consider first  the closed-loopdirectional control sys-	for determining large scale changes in position.
tem  from  Segel  (196W   shown  in  Fig.  1. Starting   at    Consideration  of  the  control  loop of  Fig.  1 shows 
the left of the figure, there is a desired path  or  tra-  that  each of its elements plays a vital role in the overall 
jectory that the ship's conning officer wants to follow controllability of  the  ship.  The  last  two  elements  of 
either  under  conditions of  steady  steaming  at  sea  or  the  loop, the  "ship"  and  the  "steering  gear  and  rud- 
in maneuvering. In an idealistic case, the desired path der," are of the greatest  concern to the  naval architect 
would be displayed for use by the helmsman (or al- although the human factors present  must  be contin- 
tematively by an autopilot). Simultaneously, again for ually reviewed to develop a successful design.
the  idealistic  case,  the  path  actually being traversed			Whereas the directional control loop of Fig. 1 func- 
would also be shown on the  display. If these two paths		tions to determine the path, a second loop of interest, 
do not coincide, corrective action is taken by the helms-		the speed control loop, functions  to determine  the 
man  or  autopilot  by changing  the  helm in a direction		speed along the path. The only common link between 
that   will  tend  to  correct  the  path  error. This action		the two loops is the conning officer, who issues the 
activates  the  steering  gear  which changes the rudder		orders in both cases. In the case of the speed control 
position  which  in  turn  exerts   a  control  force on the		loop, an operator or engineer receives the orders of 
ship.  This  control  force  acts  to  induce on the hull an		the conning officer and manipulates the power output 
angle of attack, an angular velocity, and  other motions.		and direction of rotation of the main propulsion IDa- 
These  motions of the  hull  introduce  the major hydro-		chinery to maintain, accelerate, slow down, stop, or 
dynamic  forces  and  moments  that  effect the  change		reverse the speed of the  ship. In the  open sea where in 
heading  and path.		decisions can be made in a more leisurely manner, the 
In  addition  to control  and hydrodynamic forces and	conning officer has ample time to issue the necessary 
moments,  external  disturbances  such as the wind, cur-		orders to both control loops. In restricted  and  con- 
rent,  or  waves  may  also be  simultaneously acting on		gested waters, however, orders to  both control loops 
the ship. Ideally, the resultant  heading  and actual path		may have to be issued simultaneously. With develop- 
coordinates  can then  be  fed  continuously  back to the		ment of automation, the integration of these loops and 
helmsman's  display.  This  last  step  closes the control		the elimination of the intermediate roles of the helms- 
loop.		man on the bridge and the operator in the engine room
is becoming commonplace.
With today's  sophisticated  drill rigs  and track-keep-
1 Complete references  are  listed at  the  end of the chapter.	ing  vessels,  the  automatic   controller  has  indeed be-




CONTROLLABILITY	193




POSITION OF C.G. OF SHIP AT TIME t 0

 
Fig. 2 Orientation of fixed oxes and moving oxes {Hoyt, 1948)


come quite advanced. Heading and speed, plus 
transverse position error and fore and aft position er­



erence axes x0 and y0 whose directions are fixed with 
respect to the surface  of  the earth.  For  surface ships 
in calm water, it is obvious that the path of the center  
of gravity is restrained at all times to the horizontal 
plane x0Yo. The positive direction of the x0-axis is taken 
to be in the general direction of the motion; its precise 
direction s arbitrary, but is fixed with respect to the 
earth. Positive z0 is taken downward  or into the plane 
of the paper, positive Yo is to starboard. The motion of 
the ship subsequent  to time,  t  = t0 ,   is completely 
defined by the coordinates XoG, YoG and the angle of 
yaw, l/J. Since in Fig. 2, Z0 is positive downward into 
the paper, the sign of l/J shown in Fig. 2 is negative. 
Referring to these axes fixed in the earth, the New­ 
tonian equations of motion of the ship are:
Xo = 11 x oG (Surge)


ror are used to compute vector thrusts required of the 
various force effectors (propellers, rudders, thrusters, 
etc.), and proper distribution of correction forces/ mo­


Yo = 11 fl oG (Sway)
N  = I. {jJ	(Yaw)


(1)


ments is automatically ordered.
  	Axes Fixed Relative to the Earth. The basic 
dynamics of maneuvering and coursekeeping can be 
described and analyzed using Newton's equations of 
motion. Basic equations in the horizontal plane can be 
considered first with reference to one set of axes fixed 
relative to the earth and a second set fixed relative to 
the ship.
  Fig. 2 shows typical fixed and moving axes for a 
surface ship. The path is usually defined as the tra­ 
jectory of the ship's center of gravity. Heading refers 
to the direction (l/1, angle of yaw) of the ship's longi­ 
tudinal axis with respect to one of the fixed axes. The 
difference between the heading and the actual course 
(or direction of the velocity vector at the center of 
gravity) is the drift or leeway angle, /3. When the ship 
is moving along a curved path, the drift angle is thus 
the difference in direction between the heading and 
the tangent to the path of the center of gravity.
  There are significant factors  that  couple  the speed 
of a ship and its path. For example, it  is shown later 
that path changing (turning) and even path keeping 
(coursekeeping) cause involuntary speed reductions. 
These effects arise from the fact that any misalign­ 
ment between the x-axis of  the ship as  shown  in Fig. 
2 and its velocity vector, V, increases the drag force 
acting on the ship. In addition, on multiple-screw ves­ 
sels the thrust produced by each propeller can be con­ 
trolled individually so as to influence  the path as well 
as the speed. On ships with an odd number of propel­ 
lers, or with any number of unirotating propellers, the 
direction of rotation of the uncompensated-for propel­ 
ler(s) influences the path. Even on ships where the 
trajectory control and speed control loops operate in­ 
dependently, changes in the direction of propeller ro­ 
tation are commonly used in conjunction with rudder 
action to control the motion in restricted waters.
Fig. 2 shows a right-hand orthogonal system of ref-


where the two dots above the symbols XoG, YoG and l/1 
indicate the second derivatives of those values with 
respect to time, t, and,
X0 and Y0 = total forces in x0 and Yo directions respec­ 
tively
11 = mass of ship
N = total moment about an axis through the 
center of gravity of ship and parallel 
to the z0-axis
I. = mass moment of inertia of ship about the
z0-axis
lJi = yaw angle in the horizontal plane meas­ 
ured from the vertical x0 z0 plane to the 
x-axis of the ship.
  	Axes Fixed in the Ship. In spite of the apparent 
simplicity of Equations (1), the motion of a ship is 
more conveniently expressed when referred to the 
axes x and y fixed with respect to the moving ship 
as also shown in Fig. 2. The moving axes, like the 
fixed axes x0 and Yo, form a right-hand orthogonal 
system, but with the difference that the origin stays 
at the center of gravity for all time, t. The x-axis is 
along the cen­ terplane, coincident with the 
longitudinal axis of in­ ertia which may be assumed, 
with very small error, to be parallel to the baseline 
of the ship. Its positive direction is forward. The 
direction of the x-axis is re­ ferred to as the heading; 
hence l/J is the heading angle as well as the yaw 
angle. The z-axis is also in the centerplane of the 
ship, but is normal to x and is pos­ itive downward; 
the y-axis is normal to x and z and is positive to 
starboard. The instantaneous linear velocity of the 
origin of the moving axes is represented by the 
vector V and the orientation of the moving axes 
with respect to the direction of motion is given by the 
angle,
/3,the so-called drift angle, or angle of attack 
measured from V to x as shown in Fig. 2. The 
velocity V is, of course,  always  tangent  to the path 
of  the ship. The


194	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



orientation of the moving axes  with respect  to the x0 , 
Yo axes is, as noted earlier, the angle of yaw iJ,. In the 
particular case shown in Fig. 2, both /3 and iJ, are 
negative.
  In order to convert Equations (1) from axes fixed in 
the earth to axes fixed in the moving ship, the total 
forces X and Yin the x and y-directions, respectively, 
are expressed in terms of X0 and Y0 :
X = X0 cos iJ, + Y0 sin iJ,


at the longitudinal position of the center of gravity is 
desirable for two reasons; one is to simplify certain 
computations, the other is that the location of the cen­ 
ter of gravity is not constant but changes with the 
condition of loading. (Throughout this chapter it is 
assumed that LCG coincides with LCB and with the 
midship location.)
  	Forces Acting on a Vessel During a Maneu­ 
ver. The forces and moments (left hand side) of the 
equations of motion (5) are built up of four types of



likewise


Y = Y0    
cos iJ,  -  
X0  sin iJ,

x oG  = 
u cos iJ, 
-  v sin 
iJ,


(2)


forces 
that act 
on a 
ship 
during a 
maneuv
er:

  (a)	H
ydrod
ynami
c 
forces 
acting 
on the 
hull 
and 
appen
dages 
due to 
ship 
veloci
ty and 
accele
ration, 
rud­


y OG   = u sin iJ, + v cos iJ,	(3)
where the dot above the symbol signifies the first 
derivative of the quantity with respect to time, and u 
and v are the components of V along x and y, respec­ 
tively. Then
x 0G = ucoslji- iJ sinlji-(usinlji+vcoslji)ij,
y oG = it sin ljJ + iJ cos ljJ + (u cos ljJ - v sin ljJ) iJi	(4)
Substituting Equation (4) in Equation (1) and inserting 
the resulting values of X0 and Y0 in Equation (2) yields 
the simple expressions:
X = 11( it  -  v ij,)
Y = 11( 1J + u ij,)
These and the third member of Equations (1) comprise 
the pertinent equations of motion in the horizontal 
plane assuming zero roll, pitch, and heave. Roll, pitch, 
and yaw are the rotary ship motions about  the  x,  y, 
and z-axes, respectively. Surge, sway and  heave  are 
the translatory motions along the same axes. For com­ 
pleteness:
X  = 11(u -  vii,)	is surge
Y = 11( 1J + uijJ)	is sway	(5)
N  = I, {fr	is yaw
  Note the existence of the term 11u ij, in the equation 
for Y and 111J, in the equation for X, whereas terms 
like these were not present in Equations (1). These are 
the so-called centrifugal-force terms which exist when 
systems with moving axes are considered, but do not 
exist when the axes are fixed in the earth.
  Equations (5) have been developed for the case 
where the origin of the axes, 0, is at the center of 
gravity of the ship. For many reasons, it is frequently 
desirable to locate the origin not at the  center  of 
gravity but rather at the intersection of planes of 
symmetry. For example, for body-of-revolution sub­ 
marines, if O is located at the axis of symmetry rather 
than at the vertical position of the center of gravity, 
important simplifications are achieved. For surface 
ships, locating the origin at the midlength rather than


der deflection, and propeller rotation.
  (b)	Inertial reaction forces caused by ship accel­ 
eration.
  (c)	Environmental forces due to wind, waves 
and currents.
(d)	External  forces such as  tugs or thrusters.

  The first two types of forces generally act in the 
horizontal plane and involve only surge, sway and 
yaw responses, although rolling effects (heel) 
occur in the maneuvering of high-speed ships and 
the Small Wa­ terplane Area Twin Hull (SWATH) 
vessels. Hydro­ dynamic forces fall into two basic 
categories, those arising from hull velocity through 
the water (damping forces) and those arising from 
hull accelerations through the water (added mass 
forces). The ship ac­ celerations produced by these 
and any external forces result in balancing inertial 
reaction (d'Alembertforces and moments), 
especially when turning.
  The effect of a rudder on turning is indirect. 
Moving the rudder produces a moment that causes 
the ship to change heading so as to assume an angle 
of attack (leeway angle) to the direction of motion of 
the center of gravity. Consequently, hydrodynamic 
forces on the hull are generated which, after a time, 
cause a  change of lateral movement of the center of 
gravity. The lat­ eral movement is opposed by the 
inertial reactions. If the rudder remains at a fixed 
position, a steady turning condition will evolve when 
hydrodynamic and inertial forces and moments come 
into balance.
  When in shallow or restricted waters, various com­ 
plex effects come into play. Interactions between ves­ 
sels further complicate hydrodynamic and  inertial 
force analysis. Section 13 describes how some of 
these complications have been treated.
  The ship may also be operating and maneuvering 
in an environment where wind, waves, and current 
are present. The effect of current is usually 
incorporated with the hydrodynamic forces by 
considering the rel­ ative velocity between the 
vessel and the water al­ though studies in restricted 
waters require more careful analysis. Wind and 
wave forces are generally treated as external forces 
as described in Section 12. Wind velocity is 
generally unsteady and hence forces


CONTROLLABILITY	195


and moments due to wind will  be  time  dependent.  on ship length  and on the relative  magnitudes  of wave 
These forces are generally proportional to the above length and amplitude.
water area of the ship and the  square  of the  relative  Pitching  motion changes  the shape of the immersed 
velocity between the ship and the wind. Forces and hull and can therefore have significant  effects  on the  
moments also vary with the direction of the wind ve- coefficients in the  equations  of motion, particularly  in 
locity  relative  to  the ship's axes.	quartering and following seas.
  Two  distinct  types  of  wave  forces  act. The steady		Finally, tugs and thrusters create  effective  forces 
and  slowly  varying  forces  due  to second-order wave	when utilized at relatively slow speeds. The forces they 
drift   effects   are  generally   more  important for  ship	develop are for the most part external to the hydro- 
controllability  than the first-order  forces, which are of	dynamics of the maneuver and are normally treated 
primary   importance   for  seakeeping,   as described  in	as independent additions.
Chapter  VIII.  However,  the  latter   can  be  important      The simple case of controllability,  assuming  a calm 
for the case of following seas where frequency of open sea  without  wind, waves,  current,  and  external 
encounter is small. Wave drift forces depend primarily forces, will be considered first.



Section  3
Motion Stability and Linear Equations
  3.1  Definitions  of  Motion  Stability.  The concept of   hierarchy.  Achieving straight-line  stability  (Case I) is 
path keeping is strongly  related  to  the  concept  of  the  designer's  usual  goal for most ships when steered  
course stability  or stability  of direction. A body is said  by  hand.  The  other  cases  require  various  degrees  of 
to be stable in any particular state of equilibrium in automatic control.
rest or motion if, when momentarily disturbed  by an  3.2  Course  Stability  With Controls  Fixed and  Controls 
external force or  moment,  it  tends  to  return,  after  Working.  All of these  kinds of stability  have meaning 
release from the disturbing force, to the state of equi- with control surfaces (rudders) fixed at zero, with con- 
librium existing before  the  body was disturbed.  In the  trol  surfaces  free  to  swing,  or  with  controls  either 
case of path keeping, the  most  obvious external  dis-  manually  or  automatically  operated.  The  first  two 
turbing force would be a wave or a gust of wind. For
optimum path keeping, it would be desirable for the 
ship to resume its original path after passage of the 
disturbance, with no intervention by the helmsman. 
Whether this will happen depends on the kind of motion 
stability possessed.
  The various kinds of motion stability associated with 
ships are classified by the attributes of  their  initial 
state of equilibrium that are retained  in the  final path 
of their centers of gravity. For  example,  in  each  of 
the cases in Fig. 3, a ship is initially assumed to be 
traveling at constant speed along a straight path.  In 
Case I, termed straight-line or dynamic stability, the 
final path after release from a disturbance retains the 
straight-line at~.ribute of the initial state of equilib- 
rium, but not its direction. In Case II, directional sta- 
bility, the final path after release from a disturbance 
retains not only the straight-line attribute of the initial 
path, but also its  direction. Case III  is similar to Case 
II except that the ship does not oscillate after the 
disturbance, but passes smoothly to the same final path 
as Case II. The distinction between these two cases is 
discussed in Section 4. Finally, in Case IV, positional 
motion stability, the ship returns  to the  original path, 
ie: the final path not only has  the  same  direction  as 
the original path, but also its same transverse position 
relative to the surface of the earth.
The foregoing kinds of stability form an ascending


196	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


cases involve only the last two elements of the control 
loop of Fig. 1, whereas the last case involves all of the 
elements of the control loop. In normal marine usage 
the term stability usually implies controls-fixed sta- 
bility; however, the term can also have meaning with 
the controls working. The following examples indicate 
distinctions:
  (a)	A surface ship sailing a calm sea possesses 
positional motion stability in the vertical plane (and 
therefore directional and straight-line stability in this 
plane) with controls fixed. This is an example of the 
kind of stability shown by Case IV of Fig. 3. In this 
case, hydrostatic forces and moments introduce a 
unique kind of stability which in the absence of these 
forces could only be introduced either by very sophis- 
ticated automatic controls or by manual control. The 
fact that the ship operator and designer can take for 
granted this remarkable kind of stability does not de- 
tract from its intrinsic importance.
  (b)	In the horizontal plane in the open sea  with 
stern propulsion, a self-propelled ship cannot possess 
either positional or directional stability with controls 
fixed because the changes in  buoyancy  that  stabilize 
in the vertical plane are nonexistent in the horizontal 
plane. However, a ship must possess both of  these 
kinds of stability with controls working either under 
manual or automatic guidance. Possible exceptions in- 
clude sailing vessels, some multi-hull ships, and foil or 
planing craft but not other surface effect ships.
  (c)	The only kind of motion stability possible with 
self-propelled ships in the horizontal plane with con- 
trols fixed is straight-line stability. In fact, many ships 
do not possess it. In subsequent sections of this chap- 
ter, with some exceptions, whenever controls-fixed sta- 
bility is mentioned, the intended meaning is controls- 
fixed straight-line stability. This kind of stability is 
desirable, but not mandatory.
  With each of the kinds of controls-fixed stability, 
there is associated a numerical index which by its sign 
designates whether the body is stable or unstable  in 
that particular sense and by its magnitude  designates 
the degree of stability or instability. To show how these 
indexes are determined, one must resort to the differ- 
ential equations of motion.
  3.3	Assumptions of Linearity and Simple Addable 
Parts. In order to understand  the  impact  of various 
ship design characteristics and features on ship con- 
trollability, it is necessary to first become familiar with 
certain fundamental aspects relating to the concept of 
stability and to the development and use of the linear 
equations of motion. The use of  non-linear equations 
for analysis and prediction and the determination of 
coefficients through captive model tests, use of theo- 
retical		and	empirical	coefficient	determination 
methods, and systems analysis is introduced in Sec- 
tions 8 and 9.
  The force components X; Y and the moment com- 
ponent N in Equation (5) are assumed to be composed


CONTROLLABILITY	197

change in forward velocity or forward acceleration will 
produce no transverse force with ship forms that are 
symmetrical about the xz-plane. Finally, if the ship is 
in fact in equilibrium in straight-line motion, there can 
be no Y-force acting on it in that condition, therefore
F11(u1, v 1,  u 1 ,   v 1 ,    t/J 1,     t/11) is also zero. Only u 1 is not 
zero but is equal  to  the  resultant  velocity,  V,   in  the
initial equilibrium condition. With these simplifications, 
Equation (8) reduces to
aY	aY	aY	aY ..
Y = -	V	iJ	\Ji	t/J (9a)
av	av	a*	aif,






Fig. 4 Lineari:zation of Taylor expansion of a function of a single variable,


and similarly the surging force and the yawing mo­ 
ment can be written as:
aY .	ax	ax	ax v·


f(x)


X=a-uu  +a-u6u+
ax.	ax ..


av-v+


av-



function of two variables x and y is a simple sum of 
three linear terms as follows:
/(x,  y)  = /(x1, Y1) + 6x aJ  y) + 6y aJ	y) (7c)
where both 6x and 6y must be small enough so that 
higher order terms of each can be neglected as well 
as the product 6x6y.
  The assumption that renders linearization reason­ 
ably accurate, namely, that the admissible change in 
variables must be very small, is entirely compatible 
with an investigation of motion stability. Motion sta­ 
bility determines whether a very small perturbation 
from an initial equilibrium position is going to increase 
with time or decay with time. Thus, it  is  consistent 
with the physical reality of motion stability to use the 
linearized Taylor expansions in connection with equa­ 
tion (6). For example, by analogy with Equation (7c), 
the linearized Y-force of (6) can now be written as:
Y = Fy(U1, Vi, U 'V 1, . .. ) + (u - U1) aY


+ -.	t/1 + -..	t/1	(9b)
at/I	at/I
aN	aN	aN .	aN ..
N = -	v	v	t/J	t/J (9c)
av	av	a*	ati,
where the cross-coupled derivatives aY, a*, aYI 
ati,, aNlav, and aNla v usually have small nonzero 
values because  most ships are  not symmetrical  about  
the yz­
plane even if that plane is at the midlength of the ship 
(bow and stern shapes are normally quite different). 
Howeyer, the cros :coupled derivatives aXlov, 
cJX/iHJ, ax;a t/1, and axI at/J, like aYla it and aY 
/ait are zero
because of symmetry about the xz-plane. Hence, 
equa­ tion (9b) reduces to:
X = -ax.u  + -ax 6u	(9d)
where 6u = u - u1.
  3.4	Notation of  Force and Moment Derivatives.
	In the simplified derivative notation of 
SNAME (Nomen-
clature, 1952),oY/av = Yv,oN/o* = N,;,,andsoon. 
4"lso for  mgtions  restricted  to  the horizontal 
plane
t/J =rand t/J = r.Using this notation and substituting


+ (v  -    V1) -aaY + ..... +


..	..	aY
(t/J  -	t/11) -..


(8)


(9) into (5), the linear 
equations of motion with 
moving axes in the horizontal 
plane are:


V	at/J
where the subscript 1 refers in all cases  to the values  
of the variables at the initial equilibrium condition and 
where all of the partial  derivatives  are  evaluated  at 
the equilibrium condition. Since the initial equilibrium 
condition  for  an  investigation  of  motion  stability  is
straight-lin*e  motion at  constant speed, it follows that


-X,.(u -  u1)  + (A -   X,;) u  = 0	]
-Yvv + (A	Y,) v  -  (Y,   -   Au 1   r -  Y, r = 0	(10)
-Nvv - N;, v - N,r + ([, - N,) r = 0
Every term of the first two equations of (10) has the


ships are symmetrical about their xz-plane, they travel 
in a straight line at zero angle of attack; therefore v1 
is also zero but this is not necessarily true on ships 
with an odd number of propellers or with any number


equation of (10) has the dimensions of a moment. 
Therefore, to nondimensionalize (10), which is 
conve­ nient for several reasons, the force equations 
are di­ vided through by (p I 2)L2V 2 and the moment 
equations


of unirotating propellers, Sections 5.3 and 11.0). Also


by (p/ 2)L3V 2 (Note the similarity between (p / 2)L2V 2


because of symmetry aY /au = aY /au = 0 since a


used as a nondimensionalizer in this case and (pI 2)S 
V2


198	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



used to obtain the resistance coefficients in Chapter 
V). Further, as in (Nomenclature, 1952) a primed sym­ 
bol will be used to designate the nondimensional form 
of each of the factors appearing in (10). For example:
A	v	.	vL


terpreted as the hydrodynamic  force  arising  because 
of the acceleration of the body in the fluid. This is 
precisely the definition of the Y, v-force in (10)). Sim­
ilarly, N' 1- is termed the virtual moment of inertia 
coefficient. The derivatives Y' ;- and N' 11 are termed


A' = -e;_Ls
2


v'- -


V·' v-'	y2

2

 


coupled 
virtual 
inertia 
coeffici
ents. As 
noted 
earlier, 
these 
derivati
ves 
would 
be zero 
if ship 
hulls, 
includin
g their 
appenda
ges, 
were 
symmet
rical 
about 
their yz­ 
planes.


l' ,


= !:_., r'  = 
rVL,.  r'  =r yL2
e.L5
2
  

I
t 
i
s
 
c
o
n
v
e
n
i
e
n
t 
t
o
 
u
s
e
 
a
 
n
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
h
a
t 
d
i
s
t
i
n
g
u
i
s
h
e
s
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
r
c
e
s
 
a
n
d
 
m
o
m
e
n
t
s
 
a
c
c
o
r
d
i
n
g
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
i
r 
o
r
i
g
i
n
s
. 
F
o
r 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
t
h
e
 
n
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
Y
v
v
 
w
i
l
l 
b
e
 
u
s
e
d
 
t
o
 
d
e
n
o
t
e
 
t
h
e
y-
c
o
m
p
o
n
e
nt  
of 
th
e 
h
y
dr
o
d
y
n
a
m
ic  
fo
rc
e 
ac
ti
n
g 
at  
th
e


Y' = ·Y' = ·N' = ·N'


 	N_r_


center of gravity of the ship that is 
developed as a


V	evv '	r


evv 1	V


evv 1	T


evv


result of an 
angle of 
attack, /3. As 
has been 
shown,


2	2	2


2		Yvv is only a 
linear 
approximation to, 
or linearization 
of, this Y-force 
as will be further 
evident from 
later


Y'. =	Y  • .  Y'.  =   Y, . N'.=	N,  . N =	N,


examination of Fig. 10. Similar symbols and 
definitions


V	e.u'	T


e.L4 1 	V


e.v1	f


l!.L5


are included 
in the 
nomenclatur
e for other 
forces and


2	2	2	2
Thus, for example, the nondimensional forms of the 
first couple of terms of the last of Equations (10) are:
N'.v'-	( 	(e::J v) - e:::.:


moments.
  3.5	Control Forces and  Moments.  It  is  important 
to note that all of the terms of (10) or (11) must 
include the effect of the ship's rudder held at zero 
degrees (on the centerline). On the other hand, if we 
want to con­ sider the path of a ship with controls 
working, the equations of motion (10) or (11) must 
include terms on


2	2
N ,.v., --(N- ·) (v- L) _-N.v-.
v	!!.v	v2	;puv/
2	2
etc.
If the surge equation is neglected and if the previous 
notation is adopted, (10) becomes in nondimensional 
form:


the right-hand side expressing the control forces and 
moments created by rudder deflection (and any other 
control devices) as functions of time. The linearized y­ 
component of the force created by rudder deflection 
acting at the center of gravity of the ship is Ya 6R (see 
Fig. 5) and the linearized component of the moment 
created by rudder deflection about the z-axis of  the 
ship is Na 6R where


-Y'vv' + (A' - Y'.W - (Y'r - A')r'
-Y',r' = 0
-N'vv' - N'. v' - N'rr'
+ (I', - N',)r' = O




(11)


where the main difference between (10) and (11), aside 
from the prime notation, is that u1 has disappeared 
since u 1/ V ::::: 1 for small perturbations.
Because  of  the fact  that  the derivative  Y' 11   enters
into Equation (11) as  an  addition  to the mass term, it 
is termed the virtual  mass coefficient.  (The term  Y' 11 
is always  negative;  i.e., Y acts  to oppose  positive  v ,
see Section 4.2.) It is thus identical to the concept of 
added mass. (The force required to accelerate  a  body 
in a fluid is always larger than the product of the actual 
mass of the body times its acceleration. This fact has 
given rise to the concept of "entrained" or "added" 
mass.  However,  this added  force  should  be really in-

















Fig. 5 Rudder-induced turning moments


CONTROLLABILITY	199


aR   = rudder-deflection angle, measured from xz­ 
plane of ship to plane of rudder; positive 
deflection corresponds to a turn to port 
for rudder(s) located at stern
Y6 , N6 = linearized derivatives of Y and N with re­



  With these assumptions the equations of motion 
in­ cluding the rudder force and moment, are as 
follows:
Moment: 
(Yaw)
(12)


spect to rudder-deflection angle 8R
  The lateral force from the deflected rudder thus cre­ 
ates a moment to turn the ship. This turning action 
causes the ship to develop an angle of attack with


Force: (Sway)
where:


A' y iJ - Y' V v' - (Y' r - A) r'
= Y'8 aR


respect to its motion through the water. The lateral 
forces then generated by the well designed ship (acting 
as a foil moving in a liquid at an angle of attack) create 
a moment, Nvv, that greatly augments the rudder 
moment. The combined moments cause the turning 
motion as indicated in Fig. 5.
  For the case of small perturbations, which  is  the 
only case where (10) and (11) apply, only small deflec­ 
tions of the rudder are admissible. With this restric­ 
tion, the derivatives such as Y' v, N' v, Y' r, and N' r are 
evaluated at 8R  =  0 and  are  assumed  not to change 
at other admissible values of 6R. Furthermore,  for 
usual ship configurations, Y' ;- ::::: 0 and N';, ::::: 0.


n ', = I', -  NT	2 /, 
A'y = A' - Y',,;;; 2 A'
  It will be shown in the next three sections how the 
linearized equations developed so far can be used to 
analyze the problem of course stability and steady 
turning. But to make numerical predictions it is nec­ 
essary to obtain values for some or all of the coeffi­ 
cients or derivatives involved. This is primarily  done 
by means of captive model tests, as discussed in Sec­ 
tions 8, 9 and 16. Theoretical approaches to estimating 
some coefficients and approaches are also described in 
Section 16.




Section 4
Analysis of Coursekeeping and Controls-Fixed Stability


  4.1	Stability Indexes. Using only linear terms, so­ 
lutions to the sway and yaw equations provide linear 
transfer functions permitting the review of the sta­ 
bility of motion. This Section develops the basic sta­ 
bility indexes and describes the definitive spiral 
maneuver whose numerical measures are indicative of 
the stability characteristics of a ship.
  Equations (12) are two simultaneous differential 
equations of the first order in two unknowns, the hor­ 
izontal-velocity component, v', and the yaw angular­ 
velocity component r'. The simultaneous solution of 
these two equations for v' and r' yields a second-order 
differential equation which leads to the concept of 
straight-line stability. The solutions for v' and r' cor­ 
respond to the standard solutions of second-order dif­ 
ferential equations which are as follows:


increase with increasing time, a straight-line path 
will never be resumed, and the ship may end up in a 
steady turn with its rudder held fixed at zero.
  The relationship between the stability indexes, o-, of 
solution (13) and the stability derivatives of  (11) can 
be obtained by substituting the solutions (13) back into 
(11). If this is done, a quadratic equation in a- is ob­ 
tained:
Aa-2   + Ba-  + C = 0	(14)
where
A= n', Ay
B = - n',Y'v -AyN',
C = Y'V N' T     -   (Y' T     -   A')N'V


v' = V1eo-1t + V2eo-2t 
r' = R1eu1t + R2euzt


(13)
  

The two roots of Equation (14), 
both of which must be negative for 
controls-fixed stability are:


wheni e = 2.718; V1 , V2, Ri, and R2 are constants of 
integration; 0- 1 and o-2 are the stability indexes with 
dimensions of 1 / t and tis  time. It is seen from solution
(13)	that if both values of a- are  negative,  v'  and  r' 
will approach zero with increasing time which means 
that the path of the ship will eventually resume a new 
straight-line direction. This corresponds to Case I of 
Fig.  3.  If  either  o-1  or  o-2  is  positive,  v'   and  r' will


-BIA ±  [(B  I A )2 -	4CI A f 2
0-1,2  =	2
	(14a)
  From a practical standpoint, o-1 alone is usually  
given for surface ships. This  is  because  the  size for 
o-2 is algebraically less than o-1 and  thus  it  is  clear 
from Equations (13) that the motion description by the 
0- 1 term is larger than the o-2 term after the distur-


200	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE










Fig. 6 Ship with a transverse acceleration, v





t--++X


celeration + v with the origin 
taken at the midlength of the 
ship. Under these circumstances, 
both the bow and stern 
experience a ii-acceleration in the 
poi:;itive y­ direction. Therefore, 
the inertial reaction pressure  of 
the water being accelerated by 
the hull produces forces in the 
negative y-direction on both the 
bow and stern. Hence, the bow 
and the stern effects add to give a 
relatively large negative Y-force 
resulting from a pos­
itive v. If  a disturbance  of  a  negative iJ 
is placed on
the ship, the inertial pressures 
on the bow and the stern  will 
add  together  to give a  
relatively  large Y­


bance has ended. Hence o-1 alone is rather a good 
negative quantitative measure of the degree of sta­ 
bility.
4.2	The Stability Criterion. Expression (14a) re­
veals that the two essential conditions for both 0- 1 and
o-2	to be negative are:
  (a)	That Cl A be positive, i.e., Cl A > 0. If Cl A
is negative

 
will be greater than BI A and whether BI A is positive 
or negative, one value of o- will always be positive.
  (b)	That Bl A be positive. If  BIA  is  negative  and 
Cl A is positive, then both 0- 1 and 0- 2 will always be 
positive. As noted before, if both BI A and CI A are 
negative, one value of o- will be positive.
  Thus the conditions for stability are reduced to the 
requirements that BI A and CI A must both be positive 
quantities. Since each of the terms of A, B, and C are 
nondimensionalized by the same quantities, the mag­ 
nitudes and the signs of  A, B, C may  be  determined 
by examination of either the dimensional or nondi­ 
mensional derivatives appearing in the  definitions  of 
A, B, and C in Equation (14). Because the nondimen­ 
sionalizing items, p, V, and L are always taken as 
positive, they do not change the signs of the deriva­ 
tives.
  The derivative Y, will be treated first. It is the slope 
of the Y-force with respect to an acceleration v, and 
appears  in the definition  of  both A and B of  (14). The
sketch shown  in Fig. 6 represents  a ship with an ac-


force in the positive y-direction. Hence, the 
plot of Y versus iJ would appear as shown in 
Fig. 7, and  the slope Y. taken at iJ = 0 would 
be a negative value of relatively large 
magnitude. For ship-shaped  bodies with large 
length to beam (LIB) ratios,  the magnitude of 
Y. is approximately that of the ship's 
displacement, t::,., For example, theoretically 
calculated values of Y.
for ellipsoids  give values of -0.9 t::,. for LIB  = 5:
-0.95 t::,. for LIB= 8.5; and - 1.0 Ii for LIB= 
oo. Thus, the term (!::,. - Y,) which occurs in 
both A and B is a large positive number with 
a magnitude of al­ most 2 t::,. Equation (12).
  Like Y,, the derivative N, appears in both A 
and B, and is also always negative and 
relatively large as will be shown in Fig. 8. A 
sample plot of Nversus r follows the same 
relationship as Yversus iJ in Fig. 7.
  Just as the magnitude of Y, is almost as 
large as Ii for ship-like forms, the 
magnitude of N, is almost as large as/,. 
Theoretical calculations for ellipsoids show 
that N, =  -0.7 /, for LIB=  5; N,  =  -0.8 /, 
for LI B = 8.5; and N;- = - 1.0 /, for 
LIB= oo.
As was indicated in the analysis of the derivative
Y.	both the bow and the stern add to 
contribute to a la ge negative Y,;, However, 
in the case of N,;, again the   bow   and   
stern   oppose   each   other   and N,;, like 
Y;-, is usually a relatively small quantity of 
uncertain sign provided the origin is taken 
close to the ship midlength.
  The sign and magnitude of A may now be 
deter­ mined:
A  =  n',  t::,.'"1     = (I'. -  N'r   )   (t::,.'  -   
Y' ;,) >  0









-4-


<N;rl STERN (N;/l BOW


!(Y,;JSTERN








YvALWAYS NEGATIVE
Fig.  7    Typical  Y versus v relationship	Fig. 8 Ship with an angular acceleration


CONTROLLABILITY	201



To evaluate the relative magnitudes of B and C, it is 
necessary to examine the nature of the derivatives Yv, 
Nv, Yr, and Nr. In Fig. 9, the nature  of  the  forces 
acting on a body with a velocity v added to a forward 
velocity u is shown. It is seen that as a result of the 
angle of attack, /3:::::: -v/V on the body, both the bow 
and the stern experience a lift force oppositely directed 
to v. Hence, Yv is always negative. However, the bow 
contribution to the total Yv v-force is  usually  larger 
than that of the stern so that  the  center  of  action  of 
the total force in the y-direction owing to v is consid­ 
erably forward of the midlength of the ship.  Hence, 
with the origin at the midlength, Nv is also usually a 
negative quantity for ships  without  fins or rudders.  It 
is obvious that the  addition  of  a  rudder  at  the  stern 
of a ship, for example, will increase the magnitude of 
(Yv v)stern and hence decrease the negative  magnitude 
of Nv. If the rudder were sufficiently large, it  might 
even cause Nv to become positive; however, this is not 
usually the case. A typical plot of Y versus v and
possible plots of  N versus v  with the origin at  00 are
shown in Fig. 10.
In analyzing the effect of an angular velocity r on
Y




OOMINATES
{USUAL CASE)
Fig. 1O   Typical  Y  versus  v and  N  versus  v relationships


  Hence, C is considered the discriminant of dynamic 
stability. From Equation (14),
C  = Y N -N (Y -A)	(14b)
and the condition for stability is simply:
Y N -N (Y -A') > 0	(14c)
or


  and N, a location B forward and S aft are assumed 
as shown in Fig. 11. The origin is again taken at the


Y'vN'r


> N' v ( Y'r - A')


(14d)


midlength. When the ship is moving ahead with a ve­ 
locity V and an angular velocity + r is added, point


with the inequality of Equation (14c) expressed as
N'r	N',,	0


B at the bow has an angle of attack from starboard


------>


(14e)


(:::r::: d1 / V  for  small  r)  producing  a  negative  Y-force 
and a negative N-moment on the bow. Similarly, point 
S at the stern experiences an angle of attack from the 
port side producing a positive  Y-force at  the stern and 
a negative N-moment. Hence, the bow and the ster:n 
add to give a large negative N for a positive r, whereas 
bow and stern oppose each other to give either a small 
positive or negative Y-force for a positive  r, negative  
if the bow dominates. For a negative r, the angles of 
attack change to opposite sides and hence the force
and moment contributions change sign. Sample curves 
of Y versus r and N versus r for O at 00 are shown


Y'p -  A'	Y',,
the solution can be viewed as a relationship between the 
lever arm of forces due to yawing and sway. The 
inequalities of Equation (14c) and (14d) provide the basic 
criterion for dynamic course stability, indicating whether or 
not the ship is stable but not giving a quantitative measure-
as do the o-s of (13) and (14). Methods for estimating 
stability (0- 1) early in a de­ sign effort based only on major 
dimensions have been developed by Clark (1982) based on 
regression anal­ yses and are mentioned in Section 16.3. 
Another closely
related index T (approximately equal to 1/ 0- ) of the


in Fig. 12.


K and T 
pair of 
indexes is 
introduced 
later


1
in Section


  Since B like A is always a  large  positive  quantity 
for ships, independent of the choice of origin, the con­ 
dition for stability reduces from  B  >  0  and  C  >  0 
to only C > 0.



---	tNvvlSTERN
-	<Nvvieow
"'"'C	:.		 
,v,J..


5.4. T and K can be developed from common trials and are 
useful in comparing vessels.
-{N,­r)STERN


+Y
Fig. 9 Ship with a forward velocity, u, and a transverse velocity, v



Fig. 11 Ship with a forward velocity, v, and an angular velocity, r


202	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


ing spiral maneuver are the steady yawing rates as a 
function of rudder angle. A plot of these values is 
indicative of the stability characteristics of a ship. For 
example, if the plot is a single line going from star- 
board rudder to port and back again,  as  shown  for 
ship A in Fig. 13, the ship possesses controls-fixed, 
straight-line stability; that is, it has a negative direc- 
tional stability index. If, however, the plot consists of 
two branches joined together to form a "hysteresis" 
loop, as shown in ship B of Fig. 13, the ship is unstable; 
that is, it has a positive stability index. In addition, the 
height and width of the loop are  numerical  measures 
of the degree of instability; the larger  the  loop the 
more unstable the ship. The slope of the yaw-rate curve 
at zero rudder angle is a measure of the degree of 
stability or instability. It may be predicted using Equa- 
tion (26) or measured from plotted ship trial data.
  However, the linear theory used to develop (26) is 
unable to predict the characteristics of the hysteresis 
loop for unstable ships. For this purpose the nonlinear 
theory of Section 8 is essential. Nevertheless, it is clear 
that a ship with a hysteresis loop must have a positive 
control-fixed stability index. The existence of a loop 
means that with the rudder fixed at zero, tf1 is not 
necessarily zero; that is, the ship may continue to turn 
with the rudder amidships. The mere possibility of this, 
with no external disturbances  acting  or having acted in 
the recent past, testifies to controls-fixed instability. 
Abkowitz (1964) has pointed out the analogy be- tween 
stability in straight-line motion and stability in heel. 
Fig. 14 is a plot of the conventional righting- moment 
curve versus the angle of heel, 4>, for both stable and 
unstable ships. The resemblance between Figs. 13 and 
14 is  apparent  immediately.  For ship A of Fig. 14, 
which is stable in heel, the slope of the righting-
moment versus heel angle curve at 4> = 0 is positive, 
indicating stability. Similarly, in Fig. 13, the positive 
slope (as drawn) of tf1 versus 8R for ship A indicates that 
that ship is stable in straight-line motion. Likewise for 
the unstable ships B in Figs. 13 and 14.
The slope at the origin of both curves is negative, 
indicating instability.
  In the case of the stable ship A in Fig. 13 only one 
angular velocity (or turning rate) can result from any 
given rudder deflection. For the unstable ship B in Fig. 
13, there  are  regions  between  the  lines  aa1     and  bb1 
where there is more than one turning angular velocity 
for a given rudder deflection. For the ship unstable in 
straight-line motion, there is a region where the ship 
can turn against its rudder.
  During a spiral test, no data can be obtained for the 
unstable  ship  B on the  dotted  curve  between  (a)  and
(b) in Fig. 13, because these are points of unstable 
equilibrium for the particular rudder angles. For ex- 
ample, at zero rudder angle, the ship will tend to move 
to either positions (c)  or (c1)   depending on the previous 
time history  of the motion because  these  are positions


 




of stable equilibrium for zero rudder .deflection since 
the slopes, as drawn, of the 8R versus l/J curve at these 
points are positive.
  For a spiral test conducted from  starboard  to port, 
the unstable ship B may start with an angular velocity 
denoted by  point  (d)  in Fig.  13. As the  rudder  angle 
is reduced, the angular velocity is reduced following 
curve B, until at zero rudder deflection an angular 
velocity indicated by point (c) is obtained. Upon con- 
tinuing the rudder deflection to port, the ship still con- 
tinues to turn to starboard against the direction of the 
rudder deflection until point (a) on curve B is reached. 
Any increase of the rudder angle to port beyond point
(a) will cause the ship to suddenly assume the large 
angular velocity to port indicated by point (a), and 
perhaps temporarily even overshoot (at). Similarly, 
when the spiral is repeated from port to starboard, an 
increase in the rudder angle beyond point (b) in Fig. 
13 will cause the ship to swing as fast as its inertia 
will let it to the angular velocity indicated by point 
(bt).   Hence, an unstable  ship can turn against  its rudder 
up to a certain rudder angle and then suddenly swing 
in the opposite direction to a new stable position for 
that rudder-deflection angle.
  This behavior of a ship unstable in straight-line mo- 
tion is exactly analogous to the behavior of a  ship 
which is transversely unstable. The transversely unst- 
able ship cannot remain upright even in the absence


of a heeling moment. It will heel either to port or 
starboard to an angle of heel indicated by either (c) or 
(ct)   for  ship B of Fig.  14. These  are  positions  of 
equi- librium since the slope of curve B is positive at 
these points. If a port heeling moment is applied to the 
unst- able ship B which is initially heeled to the 
starboard angle (c) in Fig. 14, the angle of heel will be 
reduced, but will still remain to starboard until point (a) 
is reached. Any further increase  in the  heeling 
moment to port will cause ship B of Fig. 14 to lurch 
from point
(a) to point (at), which is a stable position of large heel 
to port. [The heel angle will overshoot (at), but will 
finally settle down at (aJ] Hence, no points in the 
unstable region between (a) and (b)  can  be  obtained 
for ship B during an inclining experiment. Thus, the 
behavior of an unstable ship in an inclining experiment 
would be completely analogous to that of a unstable 
ship in its spiral test.
  It was noted in Section 4.2 that the controls-fixed 
stability indexes are not speed dependent at low and 
moderate speeds for motions in the horizontal plane. 
Based on this conclusion, the results of spiral maneu- 
vers conducted at different speeds should not differ 
from one another significantly. It should also be noted 
that the results of the spiral  maneuver  shown in Fig. 
13 are essentially symmetrical about zero rudder angle 
and zero yaw rate. These are typical of results obtained 
with ships that are both dynamically and geometrically


 




symmetrical about the xz-plane. However, because of 
propeller rotation, ships with an odd number of pro- 
pellers or with any number of  unirotating  propellers 
are not dynamically symmetrical about the xz-plane. 
Therefore, the results of spiral maneuvers conducted 
with such ships are likely to be  displaced to  one side 
or the other depending on the direction of rotation of 
the uncompensated propeller. For a stable ship, the 
rudder angle at tjJ = 0 is the rudder angle needed to 
maintain a straight course. This is the initial equilib- 
rium rudder angle or 81 in the symbology of Section
3.3.	It will also usually be associated with a nonzero 
value of VI' The values of 81 and VI are also  called 
neutral angles. For an unstable ship, the rudder angle 
corresponding to the position of half the loop height 
shown in Fig. 13 is the approximate neutral angle.
  It is essential in conducting a spiral maneuver to 
allow sufficient time for conditions to "steady" at each 
rudder angle otherwise spurious results are obtained. 
Fig. 15 (Strom-Tejsen, 1965)shows results of nonlinear 
predictions (based on systems of equations similar to 
those introduced in Section 8) which are three spiral 
tests conducted with three different time intervals be- 
tween consecutive rudder deflections:
(a)	60 sec.
(b)	120 sec.
(c)	no time limit.
  In the first two cases the results show a sloped 
"hysteresis" loop giving the  impression that  the  ship 
is unstable whereas in reality, the last case shows that 
the ship is quite stable.
  As will be discussed in Sections 15 and 16,directional 
instability is not necessarily bad. Large, slow moving 
ships with directional instability can be handled in a 
quite satisfactory manner. The degree of instability 
relative to the type, size, and speed of the ship is 
important.
  It is obvious that the spiral maneuver cannot be 
conducted with submarines in the vertical plane. Here


a very simple test, called the  meander  test,  suffices.  
In this test the stern planes are deflected to a prese- 
lected value for  a very  short  time  and then  returned 
to their neutral angle. If the subsequent path followed 
by the submarine in the vertical plane is a decaying 
oscillation as shown in Fig. 3, Case II,  the  submarine 
is directionally stable. If the path is an increasing os- 
cillation, the submarine is directionally unstable. Be- 
cause ships do not possess directional stability in the 
horizontal plane, the meander test is not used in that 
plane and recourse is made to the spiral maneuver.



  4.4 The Bech Reverse  Spiral  and  Pullout  Maneu- 
vers. The Bech or reverse spiral  maneuver  (Bech, 
1968) is an alternative test to the direct spiral maneu- 
ver. In the reverse spiral test the ship is steered at a 
constant rate of turn and the mean rudder angle re- 
quired to produce this yaw rate is measured. This pro- 
cedure is repeated for a range of yaw rates (from 0.5 
deg per sec port to 0.5 deg per sec starboard, for


CONTROLLABILITY	205


instance) until a complete yaw rate versus rudder an- 
gle relationship is established. Results for a direction- 
ally stable vessel are similar to results from the direct 
spiral. For unstable vessels however, a hysteresis loop 
is identifiable although a definite relationship is indi- 
cated within the loop, Fig. 16. This is because the test 
condition is no longer controls·fixed. The results still 
provide the shape of the loop for evaluation of the 
degree of instability.
A properly calibrated rate-gyro and an accurate rud-
der angle indicator are required although in certain 
cases the test may be performed with the automatic 
steering devices available on board. If manual steering 
is used, the instantaneous rate of turn must be visually 
displayed for the helmsman, either  on a  recorder  or 
on a rate-of-turn indicator. Using the  reverse  spiral 
test technique, points on the curve of yaw rate versus 
rudder angle may be taken in any order.
  Although not commonly in use, the pullout  tests, 
Fig. 17, provide a indication of a ship's stability on a 
straight course (Burcher, 1972).The ship is first made 
to turn with some rate of turn in either direction. The 
rudder is then returned to midships (neutral  position). 
If the ship is stable, the rate of turn will decay to zero 
for turns to both port and starboard.  If  the  ship  is 
only moderately unstable, the rate of turn  will reduce 
to some residual rate. The pullout tests should be per- 
formed to both port and starboard to show possible 
asymmetry. Normally, pullout tests can easily be per- 
formed in connection with other tests being run.


     Section 5 
Stability and Control
  5.1	General. The controls-fixed stability indexes of the play between the third and fourth elements  of 
discussed  in  the  preceding  section  constitute  one  of   the  control  loop and  the  rate  at  which  the  steering 
the important elements of path keeping at sea. Because  gear  can  deflect the  rudder  in the  fourth  box of  Fig. 
the practical problem of path keeping involves re- 1.
peated  instances  of path  correction, its basic elements   (e)   The magnitude  of the control force and moment 
tend to merge with those of path changing. These basic applied to the ship by the rudder.
elements are shown on the control loop of Fig. 1. Path Of these five elements, only the second is dependent 
keeping and path  changing  ability of  a  ship  depends  on the  controls-fixed stability  of the  ship. This  is  an  
on:	important element, but so are all the others. Usually,
  (a)	The magnitude and frequency of any yawing deficiencies in any single element of the control loop 
moments and sway forces acting  to  disturb  the  ship  can be compensated for by improvements in other ele-  
from  the desired path.	ments. For example, it is shown in Section 11.2 that
  (b)	The character of the response of the ship with the use of  properly  designed  automatic  controls  in  
controls fixed to these disturbances.  This response will  element (c)  can correct  for controls-fixed instability  in 
be reflected in changes in the ship's path shown at the element (b). Often it is assumed that increases in rud- 
extreme  right  of Fig. 1.	der size, element (e), or in the rate of rudder deflection,
  (c)	The rapidity with which the error between the  element  (d), can  correct  for  deficiencies in  the  path 
ship's path and the desired  path  can be  detected,  and  keeping  or path-changing  ability of a  ship. The latter 
with  which corrective  action can be initiated.	view is shown in Section 17 to be incorrect. Although
  (d)	The rate at which the corrective action is trans- minor  degrees  of  controls-fixed  instability  are  com- 
lated into movement of the rudder. This is a function monplace in ships, the best design is likely to be that


206	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


which possesses minimum deficiencies in each element 
of the control loop.
  5.2	Definitive Maneuvers. The naval architect is 
mainly concerned with elements (b), (d), and (e) of the 
path-keeping and path-changing problems. Therefore, 
certain definitive maneuvers have been devised to dem- 
onstrate the efficacy of these elements of the control 
loop and to exclude as much as possible the influence 
of element (c). Essentially, these maneuvers establish 
the basic stability and control characteristics of a ship 
independent of its helmsman or autopilot:
(a)	Direct or reversed spiral (see Section 4.3)
(b)	Zigzag, Z, or Kempf overshoot (see Section 5.3)
(c)	Turning (see Section 6.1)
The spiral maneuver as described earlier serves mainly 
to determine stability characteristics, whereas the zig- 
zag maneuver is to determine control characteristics. 
The turning maneuver denotes turning qualities. All 
three maneuvers are important for both merchant and 
naval ships. Specific performance criteria and other 
related trials are discussed in Section 14.
  5.3	ZigZag Maneuver. Second to the spiral ma- 
neuver in importance is the zigzag maneuver, also 
known as the Kempf overshoot or "Z" maneuver 
(Kempf, 1944).
  The results of this maneuver are indicative of the 
ability of a ship's rudder to control the ship. However, 
just as the results of the spiral maneuver give some 
indication of control effectiveness (yaw-angle rate ver- 
sus rudder angle), so do the results of the zigzag test 
depend somewhat on the  stability  characteristics  of 
the ship as well as on the effectiveness of the rudder. 
The typical procedure for conducting the test is as 
follows (Gertler, 1959):
  (a)	Steady the ship as in step (a) of the spiral ma- 
neuver. (See Section 4.3).
  (b)	Deflect the rudder at maximum rate to a pre- 
selected angle, say 20 deg, and hold until a preselected 
change of heading angle, say 20 deg, is reached.
  (c)	At this point, deflect the rudder at  maximum 
rate to an opposite (checking) angle of 20 deg and hold 
until the execute change of heading angle on the op- 
posite side is reached. This completes the overshoot 
test.
  (d)	If a zigzag test is to be completed, again deflect 
the rudder at maximum rate to the same angle in the 
first direction. This cycle can be repeated through the 
third, fourth, or more executes although characteris- 
tics through the first overshoot are most important as 
discussed in Section 15.
  Fig. 18 shows the results of a zigzag maneuver car- 
ried through five executes. The results shown are those 
that can be readily obtained  with a  controlled model  
in a towing tank or with a well-instrumented ship at 
sea. With ordinary ship navigational aids, only the 
rudder angle and yaw-angle curves are readily obtain- 
able.
  The principal numerical measures of control ob- 
tained from the overshoot maneuver as illustrated in


CONTROLLABILITY	207


dent of speed. Hence, with respect  to  the ship length 
of travel scale in Fig. 18, the rudder would be deflected 
more rapidly at low speeds than at high. Hence, the


velocity or side slip angle thus eliminated, turning de­ 
pends only upon yaw rate, r, and is defined by the 
simplified non-dimensional yaw equation of motion:


rudder exerts its full influence longer at low speeds, 
which tends to reduce the nondimensional time to reach


,n z r' - N' r r' = N'BR 6R


(16)


execute as speed is reduced. However, in spite of this 
beneficial effect as speed is decreased, the time to reach 
execute usually increases with decreasing speed. (The 
effects of the rudder are reviewed further in Section 
17).
  In the case of submarines, the overshoot maneuver 
is employed in both the horizontal and vertical plane 
and its results are perhaps even more operationally 
significant in the vertical plane than in the horizontal. 
This is true because in the vertical plane submarines


Nomoto (1957, 1960, and 1966) noted that this equation 
could be divided by the yaw damping coefficient, N and 
rewritten in the parametric form:
T'   r  + r'   = K' 6R	(17)
where the  non-dimensional parameters or indexes T'
and K' are given by:
T'=   n'%IN'T  =(I'Z   -N'.T)IN'T


must operate within a relatively shallow  layer  of 
water, while they usually have ample freedom of mo­ 
tion in the horizontal plane except when they are in


= T + T; - T;
K' = N IN


(18)


restricted or congested waterways. Hence, to the sub­ 
marine operator, overshoot pitch angle and overshoot 
change of depth are very important parameters.
  5.4 The K and T Coursekeeping and Turning In­ 
dexes. This section presents the Nomoto simplified 
analysis of K and T indexes which can be developed 
from zigzag trial data. These indexes are widely used, 
simplified analysis tools developed from the linear 
equations of motion. They are useful in comparing 
coursekeeping as well as turning abilities, which will 
be presented further in Section 6.
  While Equations (11) and (12) expressed the linear 
equation as a pair of simultaneous first order differ­ 
ential equations, where the constant coefficients are 
the dimensionless acceleration and velocity deriva­ 
tives, it is possible to express these equations in an 
alternative form. It was first shown by Nomoto (1957) 
that these equations can be written as a pair of de­ 
coupled second order equations as follows:
Ti' T2' r' + (Ti' + T2') r + r' = K'6R
+ K' Ta' BR'	(15)
Ti' T2' v' + (Ti' + T2') v' + v' = Kv' 6R
+ Kv'  T4'  BR'
This expression for the coefficients in terms of the time 
constants Ti', T2', Ta' and T4'    as  well as  a system gain 
K' is consistent with control engineering practice.
  Since Equations (15) are a linear system as are (11),  
a solution similar to (13) may be derived and it  may  
be seen that the roots of the solutions  are  related  to 
the time constants as follows:
1	1
cr1   =   -  Ti'  and	cr2  =	T 2,
  Returning to the linear yaw  and sway (11) and (12), 
it can be seen that they are coupled only through the 
terms Nv' v' and Yr' r', which are typically small, par­ 
ticularly for ships with near fore-and-aft symmetry. If 
these cross-coupling terms are neglected and sway


In dimensional form the equation is Tr+ r = K6R,
where the non-dimensional parameters are related to the 
dimensional Nomoto parameters T and K by:
T'  = T(VIL)
K'  = K(LIV)
The indices T' and K' represent ratios of non-dimen­ sional 
coefficients from (18):
T'=		yaw inertia coefficient yaw 
damping coefficient
K'=	turning moment coefficient 
yaw damping coefficient
Dividing K' by T' shows that the two indexes are 
related by:
K'	turning moment coefficient
T'-	yaw damping coefficient
  In practice, Equation (15) can be solved by numerical 
integration. For the simple case where the rudder is put 
over suddenly to an angle 60 and held there, the solution 
for r is given, in terms of T and K, by:
                        (19)
This shows that the yaw rate r increases exponentially 
with time but at a declining rate dependent on T and 
approaches a steady value K60  (or K'V60 /   L). A larger K 
thus provides greater steady-state turning ability, and a 
smaller value of T provides a quicker initial response to 
the helm. Quick response implies good course-changing 
ability and good course-checking abil­ ity when a turn (or 
other maneuver) is completed. Since quick response is 
obviously valuable in course-keeping (steering), it is thus 
consistent with a smaller T. The above discussion of 
Equation (19) shows that T has no effect at all on steady 
turning rate, but a small Twould reduce the time 
required to reach a steady turn. At the same time, the 
index T is a reciprocal measure of


208	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE








 

Fig. 19 K' - T' Diagram (Nomoto 1966)


stability) will have a small 
value of T' and a large value 
of K'. In other words, a large 
ratio K' I T', or Norrbin 
parameter, P = K' 12T', 
(Nomoto and Norrbin, 1969) 
is indicative of good 
maneuverability.
1 It is not a good indicator of 
course-keeping ability (or 
good steering) however, 
because this can be achieved 
either by high course stability 
and low responsiveness (high 
T') or by low or even negative 
stability and high 
responsiveness (high 1IT') 
plus superior automatic 
control. In short, a large ratio 
K' IT' suggests good overall 
controllability only if stability 
is no greater than necessary.
  Overshoot angle, which is 
obtained from the zigzag 
maneuver (Section 4) has often 
been used as a measure of 
controllability. Nomoto 
(1966) has shown that 
overshoot angle is, for a 
given rudder angle, nearly


course stability, with stability increasing with decreas­ 
ing T. However, a negative value indicates an unstable 
dynamic character. The steering quality indexes  Kand 
T have an immediate relationship to the conventional 
measures of ship turning. It may be shown that, under 
the previously stated simplifying  assumption  that 
sway can be neglected:

 
where o-i is the stability index of Section 4. Thus, T' 
offers a direct quantitative measure of straight-line 
stability.
For steady turning at constant rudder angle & R ,
r =  K6R	=  K' V6R/ L	(20)


proportional to the product K' T'. Overshoot 
angle thus has the inherent weakness that it 
cannot be used to discriminate between a ship 
with: (a) good turning and fast response or 
good course stability (large K' and small T') 
and (b) poor turning and slow response or 
course stability (small K' and large T' ). The 
former with large K' IT', is clearly a far 
superior ship in over­ all controllability. But 
overshoot angle does indicate turn-checking 
ability.
For further guidance Nomoto has suggested that:
Turning moment coefficient ex: ARI 
LT and Yaw inertia coefficient ex: 
VI L2T
where AR is rudder area, and V is displaced 
volume. Using these approximations:
K'	ARL	A


Steady turning diameter, D0 , by definition is:
2V
Do=-r
and hence non-dimensional turning diameter, D
and K' are related by:
D 0 I L = 2VI rL = 21K '6R



U
0 I L,

(22)


T'  a: V	=  c iT	(23)
where Ci is a constant of proportionality. 
Fig. 19 sum­ marizes results for various 
ships and rudder angles, and indicates 
by the straight lines that Ci tends to be 
independent of ship type and rudder 
angle. It is clear from (23) that, since 
large K' IT' is favorable, a large value of 
ARL I 'i/ is desirable. This simplified linear 
anal­ ysis indicates that ship dimensions 
(particularly L and


  This relation can be derived from (16) in Section 5 
by neglecting sway (placing N = 0). This is in accord 
with the statement in Section 5.3 that R/L depends  
on the relative magnitudes of N and N R. It shows
that with a larger value of K' a smaller rudder angle 
may be used in achieving a given turning diameter.
  The main maneuvering qualities of a ship using lin­ 
ear analysis can thus be characterized using only the 
indexes T' and K', where increasing values indicate 
improving performance:
T'	Course stability
1 / T'	Responsiveness to rudder
K'	Turning ability
  A highly maneuverable ship (with high responsive­ 
ness to rudder and both good turning and low course


V), as well as rudder area, will have a 
significant effect. Once overall ship dimensions 
are established, both as­ pects of controllability 
can be significantly improved by increasing 
rudder size or effectiveness.
  The indexes T' and K' can be calculated 
numerically using Equation (15) if 
hydrodynamic and mass coeffi­ cients for the 
ship are known. One advantage of these 
indexes is that they can be derived from  the 
results of the standard trials or free-running 
model maneuvers for comparison with 
calculation. They give physical meaning to 
the standard trials.
  The application of T' and K' to determining 
criteria of controllability is discussed in 
Section 14.7. The ele­ ments of turning 
performance as separated from coursekeeping 
and control are introduced and ad­ dressed 
more fully in Section 6.


CONTROLLABILITY	209
Section 6
Analysis of  Turning Ability


  6.1	Characteristics of the Turning Path. All ship ma­ 
neuvering, except some stopping maneuvers, involves 
turning. The response of the ship to deflection of the 
rudder, and the resulting forces and moments pro­ 
duced by the rudder, can be divided into two portions:
  (a)	An initial transient one in which significant 
surge, sway, and yaw accelerations occur.
  (b)	A steady turning portion in which rate of turn 
and forward speed are constant and the path  of  the 
ship is circular (in the absence of significant external 
forces).
  Fig. 20 is a definition diagram for turns of any di­ 
ameter. Generally, the turning path of a ship is char­ 
acterized by four numerical measures; advance, 
transfer, tactical diameter, and steady turning diam­ 
eter. As shown in Fig. 20, all but the last are related 
to heading positions of the ship rather than to tangents 
to the turning path. The advance is the distance from 
the origin at "execute" to the x-axis of the ship when 
that axis has turned 90 deg. The transfer is the dis­ 
tance from the original approach course to the origin 
of the ship when the x-axis has turned 90 deg. The 
tactical diameter is the distance from the approach 
course to the x-axis of the ship when that axis has 
turned 180 deg. These parameters of a ship's turning 
path are useful for characterizing maneuvers in the 
open sea. Section 15 discusses the use of 'the turning 
circle further as a definitive and practical test for as­ 
sessing maneuverability.
  Fig. 20 also shows the position of the so-called pivot 
point in a steady turn. This point is of interest, because 
to an observer aboard a  turning  ship it appears as  if 
the ship were pivoting about a point usually somewhat 
abaft the bow. At this point, because of the combi­ 
nation of  the drift angle on  the ship and the  rotation  
of the ship, the flow of  water  past the ship is  parallel 
to the x-axis of the ship. Forward of this point, for a 
starboard turn the flow approaches from off the star­ 
board side of the ship as shown in Fig. 20, and aft of 
this point the flow approaches from the port side. Thus, 
a fixed vertical fin in the plane of symmetry of the ship 
would experience no angle of attack at this  location 
(see also Section 16.3). According to Fig. 20, the dis­ 
tance between the pivot point and the center of gravity 
of the ship Xe =  R sin  /3. Because small radius turns 
are usually associated with large  drift  angles,  and 
large radius turns with  small drift angles,  the product 
R sin /3 does not vary significantly for different ships 
or for the same ship at different  turning  radii.  For 
most ships the pivot point is somewhere between the 
bow and about 1 / 5 L aft of the bow (Mandel, 1953). 
Based on empirical data, the drift angle, /3, in degrees, 
generally falls within the following range of values:
/3 = 22.5 LIR + 1.45 and /3 = 18 LIR. The former


relationship yields values of Xe from 0.4 to 0.5 L de­ 
pending on the LI R ratio. The latter relationship 
yields values of Xe = 0.3L.
  During the first phase of the turn, before it 
becomes steady, there is also an apparent "pivoting" 
point. This point near the bow of the ship initially 
follows a path which is a straight-line extension of 
the approach path,
. while the stern deviates outward of the approach 
path and the bow deviates inward of it.
  The turning circle maneuver has traditionally re­ 
ceived the most attention in treatises on ship 
maneu­ verability. One reason for this is that it has 
been and still is an important practical maneuver 
that ships fre­ quently perform. Also, because the 
final phase of the turning path is a steady-state 
maneuver, it has lent itself more readily to 
analytical treatment than have transient maneuvers.
  6.2	The Three Phases of a Turn. Suppose  that  a 
ship is advancing on a straight  path  when  its rudder  
is deflected and held at a fixed angle as in Fig. 20. 
The resulting path of the ship may be divided into 
three distinct phases.

Fig. 20 Turning path of a ship


210	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE







-l8
-v
+V
+r
+f
+/B



TANGENT TO 
BASE LINE

APPROACH
 	PHASE	
(4'• v = r = V • r• 0)



-v-
L--
---
---
---
---
---
---
--
T
I
M
E
 
t

(
i
,
 
=
r
 
•
O
 
v
l
O
 
r
l
O
)

START OF RUDDER DEFLECTION, t •O
Fig. 21 Characteristics of 
transient phases of a turn






  The first phase starts at the instant that the rudder 
begins to deflect and may be complete by the time the 
rudder reaches its full deflection angle. During this 
period, the rudder force, Ya SR, and rudder moment, N8  
SR, produce accelerations and are opposed solely by the 
inertial reaction of the ship because there  has not yet 
been an opportunity for development of hydro­ 
dynamic forces arising from a substantial  drift angle, 
P, or a rotation,  r, to develop.  Hence, in this stage,  f3
= v/V   = r  = 0. Using the dimensional Equation (10)
and introducting the rudder force and moment, the 
linearized equations of motion in the first phase of 
turning are:


(10)	along with the excitation terms Ya 6R and 
Na SR are fully operative (12). The crucial 
event that takes place at the beginning of  the 
second phase of  the turn is the creation of a 
Yv v-force positively directed to starboard in 
Fig. 20 towards the center of the turn, resulting 
from the introduction of the drift angle, /3. 
The magnitude of this force soon becomes 
larger than the Ya SR-force which is directed 
to port (Fig. 5). As shown in Fig. 21 this 
causes the acceleration iJ to cease to grow to 
port and  eventually  to be reduced  to zero as 
the inwardly directed Yv v-force comes into 
balance with the outwardly directed 
centrifugal force of the ship. However, in the 
second phase of the  turn,  the path of the 
center of gravity of the ship at first re­


(a  -  Y,;)V -  Yr+	= Ya 6R
(I, - Nr)i· - N,; V = Na 6R


(24)


sponds to the Ya SR-force and 
tends to port before the Yv v-
force grows large enough to 
enforce the starboard turn. This 
port offset although visibly 
protrayed in Fig. 20 is 
negligible or nonexistent in 
practice because of


The values of the accelerations, iJ and r that occur
in this phase can be obtained from these equations. It 
may be noted in Figs. 20 and 21 that the transverse 
acceleration, iJ, is negative or directed to port in this 
phase, whereas the turn will eventually be to star­ 
board. This is because (for a rudder at the stern) the 
rudder force Ya SR is directed to port for a starboard 
turn.
The accelerations  iJ and r can exist in isolation only
momentarily, for they quickly give rise to a drift angle,
/3, and a rotation, r, of the ship. With the introduction 
of these parameters, the ship enters  the second  phase 
of turning. Here the accelerations of the ship coexist 
with the velocities and all of the terms of Equation


the shortness of phase 1, and  the quick  
development of the large Nvv-moment in ship 
forms.
  6.3	Steady Turning Radius. Finally, after 
some os­ cillation (some of which is due to 
the settling down of the main propulsion 
machinery and is characteristic of the 
particular type of machinery and its control 
sys­ tem) the second phase of turning ends 
with the estab­ lishment of the final 
equilibrium of forces. When this 
equilibrium is reached, the ship settles down 
to a turn of constant radius as shown in Fig. 
20. This is the third, or steady, phase of the 
turn. Here v and r have nonzero values, but 
iJ and rare zero. Thus, using Equa­ tions (10) 
the linearized equations of motion in a steady 
turn are:


CONTROLLABILITY	211


-Nvv - Nrr = Na8R


(25)


N'v = (N'v)OO + Y'vx'OO
are substituted in the denominator, it reduces to


  These two simultaneous equations can be solved for 
rand v provided that the stability derivatives Yv, Yr, 
Nv, Nr and the control derivatives Y8  and Na are  known. 
Noting that r' tjJ = rLIV  and  that  the  steady 
turning radius R = V Ir, then r' = LIR or the recip­ 
rocal of the ratio of the steady turning radius to the 
ship length. Solving the nondimensional version of (25) 
we obtain:
and


Y'v(N'a)OO - Y'a(N'v)OO which is also independent of the 
choice of origin, thus if the ship is stable the nu­ merator is 
positive and if the ship is unstable the nu­ merator is negative. 
The sign of the denominator is always positive for the 
following reasons:
  (a)	Y'v is always negative and N'a is always neg­ ative for 
rudders located at the stern (Fig. 22). In the figure BR is 
negative following the definition of these B's given in Section 
3.5 and following the sign con­
vention given in the nomenclature at the end of this chapter. 
The moment N resulting from negative 8, however, is positive 
according to the same sign con­ vention. Similarly, if 8 were 
positive, N would be neg­


v' =


-f}


N   'a(Y'  r    - A')  -   
Y'a N']r


(27)


ative. Hence, the 
derivative Na is 
always negative 
for


-{3 -	R [ Y'fl'r - N'v(Y'r - A'}


rudders at the stern. In Fig. 22, the force, Y, 
arising from the negative 8 is also negative, if 
8 were positive,


where {3 and 8 are in radians and positive R denotes 
a starboard turn.
  Thus, according to the preceding linear theory, the 
steady turning radius would be proportional to the ship 
length, L, and inversely proportional to the rudder­ 
deflection angle, BR, and the drift angle {3 would be 
directly proportional to 8R·
  Solutions (26) and (27) are useful for estimating the 
steady turning radii and drift angles of stable ships 
with fairly large diameter turns of about four ship 
lengths or more. They are used to estimate the turning 
radii of torpedoes, and are useful for estimating the 
turning radii of ships at less than maximum rudder 
angles.
  The great majority of merchant ships have turning 
diameters of from two to four ship lengths at full 
rudder angle, and many ships have turning diameters 
of two ship lengths or less. Such tight turns introduce 
strong nonlinearities that tend to reduce the validity 
of the linear equations of motion. Procedures for pre­ 
dicting the maneuvers of tight-turning ships are dis­ 
cussed in Section 8.
  6.4	Relationship Between Steady Turning Radius and 
the Hydrodynamic Derivatives. Equation (26) devel­ 
oped from linear theory may  be used for stable  ships 
to predict the effect of changes in the hydrodynamic 
derivatives on the turning radius. In slightly modified 
form, Equation (26) is:

!!_=
_ 2_ [Y'fl'r-	N'vCY'r- 
A')]
(26a)
L
BR	Y'vN'a - N'vY'a


  It is seen that the numerator is identically the sta­ 
bility criterion, C, Equation (14b) of Section 4.2; it was 
shown in Section 4.2 that the value  of  the  numerator 
is independent of the choice of origin. If the relation­ 
ships


Y would be positive; hence, the derivative, Y8 ,  is always 
positive hence, their product is positive.
  (b)	Y'8 is always positive, N'v is almost always neg­ ative; 
hence, subtracting their product will add posi­ tively to Y' 
vN'a.
(c)) If N' vis positive (it is rarely so), its magnitude


t: STRAIGHTENING INFLUENCE OF HULL ANO PROPELLER ON THE FLOW TO THE RUDDER
a.: ANGLE OF ATTACK ON THE RUDDER
::/:uEo iDER

 
CENTER OF THE STEADY TURN



and


N'8 = 
(N '8 
)rJj 
+ (Y 
'8 
)x'O
O




Fig. 
22 
Orie
ntati
on of 
ship 
and 
rudd
er in 
a 
stead
y 
turn 
to 
starb
oard


212	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

zAXIS	zAXIS
I





yAXIS




_
W
L._



y
A
X
I
S
_W.
L.











(Al 1st. PHASE



STARBOARD TURN
LOOKING FROM AFT	(Bl 3rd. PHASE


Fig. 23 Disposition of forces in yz plane in a turn




is bound to be small so that the larger positive Y' vN' s
product will determine the sign of the denominator.3 
It may therefore be concluded that if a ship is stable 
and its rudder is located at the stern, a positive (star­ 
board) R will always result from a negative 6 and vice 
versa. However, if the ship is unstable, theri the nu­ 
merator of the right-hand side of Equation (26) is neg­ 
ative and R will have the same sign as 6. Physically 
this means that a ship will turn against its rudder, 
which is in accord with the behavior of an unstable 
ship. Since Equation (26) deals only with the slope of 
the R versus 6 curve at 6 = 0, which is a regiQn of 
unstable equilibrium for unstable ships, it cannot  be
used to predict the turning radii of unstable ships.
  For stable ships, Equation (26) may be used to ex­ 
amine the effect of changes in the individual deriva­ 
tives on the turning radius. Equation (26) shows that 
the effect of changes in Y'v on R depends on the relative 
magnitude of (N'v) compared to N's· If N's has a 
greater magnitude than (N' v) then increasing the mag­ 
nitude  of  Yv'   would  decrease  the  radius  of  turn.  On


nator, hence R will decrease on two counts. 
On the other hand, if N' v were positive, 
increasing its mag­ nitude would increase 
the numerator and decrease the 
denominator, and hence R would be 
increased.
  The effect of N'r and N's on R' is equally 
clear. According to Equation (18), an 
increase in the mag­ nitude of N' r will 
increase R while an increase in the 
magnitude of N's will decrease . This result 
is in accord with an intuitive examination of 
the question.
  The effects of the remaining derivatives 
on R depend on the sign of N' v, and can be 
deduced from Equation
(26)	when the sign of the derivative is known (see Table
1).
  6.5	Heel Angle in a Turn. While use of 
the rudder is intended to produce 
motions only in the yaw (xy) plane, 
motions are also induced by cross coupling 
into the pitch (xz) and roll (yz) planes. The 
unwanted mo-

 Table 1-Effect of Changes in the Derivatives on 
Steady Turning  Radius (for  Stable  Ships with 
Rudder(s)  at  the Stern)


the other hand, if the magnitude of (N' v) is larger than
N's, then an increase in the magnitude of Y' v will 
usually increase the radius of the turn. Since for stable 
ships, (N'r) is usually much more negative than N's, 
the usual effect of increasing the magnitude of Y' v is 
to increase the radius of the turn. Thus, while the Yv v­ 
force is responsible for the initiation of a turn in the 
desired direction, an increase in the magnitude of Yv 
does not necessarily reduce the steady turning radius.
  The effect of N'v  on R is readily predictable.  If N' v   
is negative, increasing its magnitude will decrease the 
positive value of the numerator of the right-hand side
of (26) and increase the positive value of the denomi-
















NOTES:



Derivative

Y' r
Y's
A.'


Sign of the derivatives for ships

always negative always negative 
always negative either positive
 or negative either positive or negative 
always positive always positive




 
   8 For rudders located at the bow, N,  will always be positive and 
R will always have the same sign as 6R for stable ships. The sign  
of Y. is always positive whether the rudder(s) are located  at  the 
bow or at the stern.
  

1.	A.' is not a derivative but is included here 
for conven­ ience.
  2.	Signs in italics refer to the signs of the 
derivatives for usual ship forms.
  3.	For typical values of the foregoing 
derivatives for a wide range of merchant ship 
forms (nondimensionalized on the basis of p, L, 
T and V), see Table 6.


CONTROLLABILITY	213



tions in the roll plane, particularly, are likely to be 
large enough to be of significance. 4 The magnitude of 
the heel angles induced by the rudder can be estimated 
by considering the heeling moments arising from the 
vertical disposition of the forces described in the pre­ 
ceding section. That disposition for the first phase of 
a starboard turn, is shown in Fig. 23(a). The direction 
of most of the forces may be obtained from the first 
of Equations (24) if all terms are gathered on one side 
and equated to zero as follows:
Ya6R + Yv  v + Yr  r  -  A.v = 0	(28)
Since Ya is always positive and 6a is negative for a 
starboard turn, Ya 6a is negative or directed to port. 
Since Yu is always negative and iJ is negative in the 
first  phase  of  a  starboard  turn,  Yr  v  is positive or
directed to starboard. Since Yr may be either  positive 
or negative, the sign of Yr r is not predictable from (28).  
In  any  event,  Y1-    r is  very  small  compared  to Yv iJ. 
Finally, since iJ is negative and !:J. is positive, (-av) is 
positive or directed to starboard.
  The approximate angle of heel, </>, may be obtained 
by equating the resultant heeling moment, which is 
the sum of the moments of each of the forces in the 
yz-plane, Fig. 23(a), to the hydrostatic righting mo­ 
ment. A graphical solution of this equation is described 
in Section 7 of Chapter II. For this purpose Y v Yr may 
be taken to be acting at half draft, Ya 6a at the vertical
center of the rudder and !:J.iJ and !u:0 r at  the center of
gravity of the ship. If moments are taken  about  the 
half draft, it is obvious from Fig. 28(a) that the heel 
angle, <f>, will be to the starboard (positive) in the first 
phase of a starboard turn.
  The forces acting in the yz-plane taken from Equa­ 
tion (25) for the third phase of a starboard turn are 
shown in Fig. 23(b). If moments are taken about the 
center of gravity of the ship, it is seen that the heel
angle. <f>. is likely to be to port (negative) since Yrv +
Yrr must be much larger than Ya 6 in order to enforce 
the starboard turn. Thus, between the first and third 
phase of a turn, the heel angle of a surface  ship  
changes sign. The heel-angle time record  of  ship with 
a large turning heel angle is shown  for  a  starboard 
turn in Fig. 24. It is seen that the amplitude of  the 
initial heel to starboard in  the first  phase  of  the  turn 
is small compared to the amplitude of the second heel 
to port. This second heel involves a large overshoot 
angle beyond the equilibrium value computed in ac­ 
cordance with Fig. 23(b). However, eventually the port 
heel settles down to a fairly steady value correspond­ 
ing to the computed value for the final phase of the 
turn.
From an operational point of view,	potentially dan-


  •	For submerged submarines, the pitch angles induced in turning 
by the rudder as well as by hull asymmetries are also frequently 
large enough to be of concern.




20,----------,---------.-------,
C
l
iD

.,,.:!
:
l&J Cl

II)
o-ec.--------i1- -------+	i
I
l&J
..J
z
ct
j_p
om
t--
520






400  L-----5-'----1-0 	15
TIME  IN SECONDS
Fig. 24 Roll-angle time records for a starboard turn



gerous situation exists just prior to the completion 
of the first large heel to port. A helmsman, fearing 
too large a heel to port, might at this instant decide 
to return the rudder quickly to amidships. This 
would eliminate the Y8 6a force and the heel to port 
would be aggravated rather than alleviated. The only 
safe action to take in such a situation is to 
immediately, but slowly and cautiously, reduce the 
rudder angle and at the same time reduce speed as 
quickly as possible.
  In the case of a submarine turning, submerged, 
the heel angle is inboard (starboard heel for a 
starboard turn) throughout  all phases of  a turn. The 
reason for
this is that the positions of both  the  YriJ + Yrr force 
of Fig. 23(a) and the Yvv + Yrr force of Fig. 23(b) are 
considerably   higher  relative  to  the  center  of 
gravity
on a submerged submarine than on a surface ship. In 
particular, the bridge fairwater existing on 
practically all submarines is an effective lifting 
device and con­ tributes heavily to both the 
magnitude and the height of the Yvv-force of Fig. 
23(b), increasing rolling mo­
ment,  Kvv. It  is clear that if the  Yvv  + Yrr  force is
raised sufficiently high (on some submarines it is 
raised to a position above the center of gravity), the 
heel in the third phase of a turn will be in the same 
direction as  in the first phase of  a turn. Thus, the 
first heel of a submerged turning submarine is an 
inboard heel of very large amplitude called the snap 
roll with sub­ sequent inboard rolls of diminished 
mean values. Ac­ cording to Arentzen and Mandel 
(1960), the ratio of the snap roll in the first phase of 
a turn to the steady heel in the final phase of a turn 
may be as  large as 3½ for a submarine with a large 
bridge fairwater and as large as 5 for a submarine 
without a fairwater. The latter submarine, however, 
has a much smaller steady


 




heel angle than a submarine with a fairwater.  Thus,  
the fairwater plays a dual role in turning:

  (a)	It increases the roll excitation in a turn because 
of its large influence on the roll moment due to the 
transverse velocity Kv v.
  (b)	It increases the magnitude of the roll damping 
moment, Kpp, and hence, dampens the amplitude  of 
the overshoot of the snap roll.
  See Section 12 and 15.7 for description of yaw-roll 
coupling effects in waves and further discussion.
  6.6	Reduction of Speed in a Turn. Part of the rea- 
son that the initial snap roll of a submarine is so much 
larger than subsequent rolls is that the speed .of the 
submarine is rapidly reduced as soon as it develops a 
substantial drift angle. This is also part of the reason 
why the first roll to port of the surface  ship in Fig. 24 
is much larger than subsequent rolls. However, in the 
case of the surface ship, its speed is more greatly 
reduced by the time it experiences its  largest  heel 
angle than in the case of the submarine. This partially 
accounts for the fact that the ratio of the value of the 
first large roll to the steady heel  shown in Fig.  24 is 
not nearly as large as the comparable ratios for sub- 
marines cited from Arentzen and Mandel (1960).
  The magnitude of the speed reduction in a turn is 
largely a function of the tightness of the turning circle 
(Davidson, 1944).Fig. 25 shows the empirical relation- 
ship between the ratio of  the  speed  in a  steady  turn 
to the approach speed and of the turning diameter  to 
the ship length,  developed by  Davidson on the  basis 
of a large number of ship trial and model results. The 
discounting by Davidson of the differences between 
full-scale and model results has been shown to be er- 
roneous by Strom-Tejsen (1965), among others. Su- 
perimposed on the Davidson results in Fig. 25 are 
Shiba's (1960) results. Davidson and Shiba concluded 
that the relatively small scatter  of data  shown could 
not be related to rudder angle, approach speed, or 
rudder-area ratio, which were, of course, among the 
variables of the tests. The effect of changes in type of 
ship power plant and in ship configuration on the speed


reduction during maneuvers is discussed in 
Sections 8.7 and 16.4.
  In spite of the increasingly severe speed loss 
asso- ciated with tighter turns, Davidson 
showed that by decreasing the tactical diameter  
to  two  ship  lengths or less, significant 
operational aspects of turning are improved. 
For example, Fig. 26 shows that a 122 m (400 
ft) long, 20-knot ship with a TD/L =  2.0 
achieves a full course reversal and has almost 
completely re- gained its approach speed in the 
1%min that are re- quired for the ship to pass 
its original execute point headed in the 
opposite direction. On the other  hand, the 
same ship with a TD/L = 4.5 required 2~ min 
and




CONTROLLABILITY	215


much  more  sea  room for  the same maneuver.			Transient turning and complex maneuvers cannot 
The speed  used  in the  computation  of heel angle in	be predicted by linear theory. Instead one must resort the  
final phase  of a turn  in accordance  with Fig. 23(b)		either to non-linear theory in conjunction with captive 
should  of course  be the  reduced  speed as determined		model tests (Section 7) or to free-running radio-con-
from  Fig.  25 and  not the approach speed.	trolled model tests (Section 8).


Section  7
Free-Running Model Tests and Hydraulic Models
  7.1	Free-Running Model Tests. There are  two dis-  versed  spiral definitive maneuvers  may be carried  out 
tinct types of  model tests  used  in the  calculation  of  with  a  free-running  model and  the  resulting  charac-  
ship controllability: forced captive model tests and teristics of these maneuvers may be  directly  deter- free-
running model tests. Captive model tests will be mined. For this reason, free-running model tests have described in 
Section 8 and are useful in developing been, and still are, extensively used for predicting the coefficients for use in 
ship trajectory prediction equa- maneuvering characteristics of surface ships, and have  tions. Free-running model 
tests are more  direct  and  even  been  used  to  determine  the  maneuvering  char- make use of a self-propelled 
scale  model of the  ship  acteristics  of submerged  submarines  in the horizontal fitted with all appendages and 
remote control, so that plane.
actual  maneuvers  can be performed and controllability			Martinussen and Linnerud (1987)provide a current 
evaluated.		status of the use of free-running models for predicting 
Simple  free-running   models  are   typically used  to	maneuvering characteristics at the design stage. Some 
evaluate  turning  performance  and course keeping sta-		of the difficulties in developing test techniques are 
bility.  Such  testing  can  be  used  to obtain numerical		connected with the question of viscous scale effects as 
measures  of stability  when  the  model is fitted  with a		addressed by many including ITTC (1984), Burcher 
sophisticated   sensor-control  and  a position recording		(1975),Okamoto, Tamai, and Oniki (1972),and Niko1aev 
system.  Measured  trajectories  from  the circle, zigzag,		and Lebedeva (1980).Some detailed discussion of scale
and  reverse   spiral  definitive  maneuvers can directly	effects, particularly with regard to control surfaces, 
yield index values  for comparison with established cri-	will also be presented in Section 14.2. Other difficulties 
teria   or  similar  values   from  an   acceptable  design.	are related to the physical execution of the tests.
Section 15 discusses  further  the  development  and as-			On the physical side, cost considerations normally 
sessment  of performance  requirements.		result in utilizing the same model used for towing and 
Controllability  in shallow  water  can  also be evalu-	propulsion tests to perform free-running maneuvering 
ated  if a test  facility with variable water  depth is avail-		tests. Large models are thus often used which help in 
able.   Free-running    model   tests,    however, are  not		the reduction of scale effects but require careful test 
generally   suitable   for   evaluating stopping  perform-		execution to complete maneuvers because of space lim-
ance  since scale effects are  difficult to overcome.	itations even when performed in large basins.
  Free-running   ship  models  can  also  be used  in hy-		As Martinussen and Linnerud (1987) recount, five 
draulic  models of harbor  and waterway situations. Pil-	conditions should be met at the start of a maneuver; 
oted   remotely,   such   models   provide   a method  of	forward speed equal to approach speed with the cor- 
evaluating  various  arrangements   on the  hull, and the	responding propeller revolutions, rudder angle at neu- 
effectiveness  of various  types  of vessels under partic-	tral, and sway and yaw velocities at zero. It is difficult 
ular  shallow and restricted  waterway conditions. Some	to satisfy all five when testing large models of unstable 
large   piloted  models  are  also  used  for training,  and	ships. Priority is thus given to forward speed, propeller 
research in facilities such as the one in Sogreah, France	RPM, and yaw velocity over rudder angle. During each 
(Demenet,  Lewis,  et al; 1987).	maneuver, the controller must carefully optimize use
  7.2	Free-Running   Model    Test  Techniques.   Free-	of the basin to allow full maneuvers to be accom- 
running  model tests  require  a  model whose propeller	plished.
rotation and control-surface position may be remotely In order that free-running model  test  results  may 
controlled and recorded  as  a  function  of  time.  They  be directly applicable to a full-scale ship, the following 
also require a large  maneuvering  basin,  as  well  as  additional conditions, added to that  of geometric  sim- 
means for determining and recording the Xo and Yo- ilitude, should be satisfied:
coordinates  of the origin of the model, the model head-    (a)    The nondimensional mass moment of inertia  of  
ing angle \fl, and, if desired, the  model heel  angle  4>,  the  model about  the  z-axis, I~, should  be identical to 
all as a function of time. Using instructions like those that of the ship.
for the full-scale ship, the turning, zigzag, and re- (b) The model rudder should be deflected to the


216	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE





d 10.0
I   ••·•
! 0.0-1-------
i -,o.o
:,
•	-20.0





.i     1.1
!I ,,..•,
I ,.•
" ..



1.4	CL	a
1.1

1.0

o.,
o.,



ed  ,o.o



0.4

o.a


I ..o.o
C

20.0
I o.o+--.....--r	i
10.0	10.0	ao.o
TIMI (II








,o.o	10.0












,_Ill



I	10	11      
20	H	ao H
.
5
R
  
(
.
.
.
.
)
o o Open 
water 
test, 
turbulen
ce 
provided 
by wire 
mesh 
upstream 
of 
rudder.
DD	Behind hull and 
propeller. CL based on mo­


Test with friction correction.
o o Test without friction correction.
Fig. 27 20/20 zigzag test. Model scale result



Fig. 28


del speed.
Rudder lift coefficient C, as function of rudder angle 
(Martinussen and linnerud, 1987)





same maximum angle as the ship rudder at the same 
nondimensional deflection rate as that of the ship, i.e.,

B m =    B'  =   6mvmLm =   6 vL8  . 8	( 29)
where the subscript m refers to model values and the 
subscript s to.ship values. Thus the model dimensio al 
rudder rate 6m is different from that of the ship, 6•.
  (c)	If the ship heel in maneuvers is to be properly 
simulated, the / of the model as well as its nondi­ 
mensional transverse metacentric height must be iden­ 
tical to that of the ship. (In practice, these are difficult 
conditions to fulfill.)
  (cl) The model propeller operating slip ratio should 
be identical to the ship propeller slip ratio. This is 
particularly important if the rudder is located in the 
propeller race.
(e) If the speed loss in maneuvers is to be properly


out friction correction, showing the effect of a more 
effective rudder in the latter case.
  Condition (e) is usually ignored with a constant 
RPM held. Free-running model tests thus show less 
speed loss in a maneuver than do full-scale results. 
Results are often considered acceptable for diesel 
powered ships which normally show only a 10-15 
percent re­ duction in revolutions in a turning circle 
with a 35 deg rudder angle. Use of a thrust and 
torque transducer would allow simulation of the 
propulsion engine char­ acteristics during tests.
  As will be presented later in Section 14.2, a rudder 
in a free stream will encounter flow separation at 
smaller rudder angles in model scale. There is a 
gen­ eral belief that a model rudder when placed in 
the propeller race, encounters a high turbulence 
level


simulated, the response of the motor that drives the



DISTANCE TRAVELL!:0


EEMHAVEN


model propeller to an augment in model resistance 
should duplicate the response of the  power  plant  of 
the full-scale ship to a corresponding augment in ship 
resistance.
  Condition (cl) is fulfilled in the ordinary self-propul­ 
sion test by having the towing carriage provide part 
of the thrust necessary to drive the model. If not ac­ 
counted for, some models will maneuver more sharply 
than the full-scale ship because the rudder force (and 
hence rudder moment) is larger for the model as a 
result of more flow past the rudder.
  For free-running models this condition is commonly 
fulfilled with by using an air propeller to provide part 
of the thrust. This air force can be measured and dy­ 
namically changed as a function of measured model 
speed to improve results. Fig. 27 shows a comparison 
of results from similar zig-zag tests run with and with-


IN	SECONDS SPEED OF APPROACH 4 KNOTS
0      2!l0    500     750    1000 METRES
 
(    AT  eow{ :.i
PULL c	'PORT FROM 1-3
lAT  STERN 1STBD FROM ..-
WATER DEPTH 13 BOm (142& DRAFT), TIDE CONDITION•LOW, CURRENT SPEED
I Om/sec, WIND DIRECTION_.. SPEED Om/soc
Fig. 29 Typical record of hydraulic model test (Panel H-10, 1975)


CONTROLLABILITY	217


which makes this scale effect neglegible. Fig. 28 sup- piloted remotely through  them to determine safety  and 
ports this conclusion through  its comparison of results  efficiency of  the  operation.  Fig.  29  shows  one  such  
for a model rudder  tested  in  open  water  with  test  hydraulic  model test  scenario, the  Port  of Eemhaven, 
results with a rudder behind a propeller on a captive Netherlands (Panel H-10, 1975).
model running  at  the  ship self-propulsion point.			In this particular case the channel bend was deter- 
The  general   problem  remains   of having  different	mined, after survey, to present the most critical prob- 
model  vs  full-scale  boundary   layer thickness,  after-		lem in the maneuvering of containerships. While the 
body separation,  and cross-flow separation. In addition		existing channel was wide enough  to accommodate a 
to the traditional  bow trip  wire Nikolaev and Lebedeva		large containership, the combined effects of the turn- 
(1980) have  applied  turbulence   stimulation  on other		ing maneuver and wind and current restricted entry 
parts   of  the underwater  hull.		time to a window of only two hours a day. And even 
Results  reported  by  Dand  (1983) indicate  that  the	with this restraint, entry was still judged to be risky
model  is  normally  more  directionally  stable than the	by the Rotterdam pilots.
ship.  Martinussen   and  Linnerud  (1987), however, in-		A hydraulic model was set up at MARIN of the 
dicate  that  by  using  large  models, predictions of sta-	Eemhaven waterway configuration and many different 
bility  characteristics   can  be  reasonably accurate  for	large proposed containership models were run through 
quite  different  hull  forms.  The  free-running model in	the turning maneuver. The rate of groundings was 30 
open  water   has  long  been  a  tool  in  the analysis  of	percent of the transits, reinforcing the pilots' fears. 
maneuverability.  The  series  type  test  results of Shiba	When proposed dredging to ease the bend was tried 
(1960) have  been  very  instructive   as  to  the effect of	in the hydraulic model, groundings were reduced to 
basic   dimensions   and  rudder   area on  maneuvering	zero with proper tug assistance (tug usage was sim- 
characteristics.	ulated using small fans mounted on the model).
  Because  of the  numerous  scaling  and other difficul-		Fig. 29 shows a sample  trajectory  resulting  from 
ties noted above, and because  free-running model tests	the Eemhaven study. As a result of the project,  the 
yield terminal  results  only providing little  insight into	Rotterdam Port  Authority  authorized  an  expensive 
the   many  individual  factors,   and  because large  ma-	easing of the channel bend entering Eemhaven. 
neuvering   basins  are  required,  alternate  procedures		While the hydraulic modeling of the waterway can 
employing  computer   simulation   in conjunction with	be made quite accurate reflecting correctly the flows 
captive  model  test   results   have  been developed and	of water, scaling problems still exist and the difficulties 
will be presented   in Section 8..	mentioned in the previous sections apply. Scales are
  Before leaving the free-running  model,  its  utility  usually  small  (1  to  100 is  common) because  of  the  
when operated in a hydraulic model of a waterway will expense of building waterway models.
next be introduced.	Pilot or helmsman control is from a bird's eye po-
  7.3   Hydraulic Models.   Models of  harbor  and  ves-   sition which provides  a better  understanding   of what 
sel waterway systems accurately modeling hydraulic is  happening,  but  in  a  compensating  manner,  move- 
flows can be constructed and then free running models ments take place many times faster than in real life.


Section  8
Nonlinear Equations of Motion and Captive Model Tests
  8.1  Nonlinear Equations of  Motion.  Captive model  can be used to develop coefficients for these  equations. 
tests and associated simulation studies using nonlinear However, as previously noted, linear theory fails to 
equations are the most powerful and flexible means predict accurately the characteristics of the tight  ma-  
available today for predicting controllability. This ap- neuvers that most  ships  are  capable  of  performing, 
proach may be initially more costly than a free-running and it cannot predict the maneuvers  of  directionally 
model test program, but once the required hydrody- unstable ships.
namic coefficients are  determined  from the model test		There is no completely analytical procedure available 
data,  a wide variety  of more  accurately predicted ma-	to this date (1989)for predicting the characteristics of 
neuvers  and  ship  operations  can  be  rapidly and eco-	these nonlinear maneuvers. As a result, current com- 
nomically simulated,  with  the  effects of environment,	puter-aided techniques utilize the experimental results 
control  systems,  and  external  forces readily studied.	from captive model tests, with the equations of motion
  Linear theory as discussed in prior sections is useful  expanded  to include significant nonlinear  and  coupled 
for analyzing the influence of ship features on controls- terms.
fixed stability and on the turning  ability of directionally		A variety of different approaches to developing a 
stable  ships  in  the  linear  range.  Captive model tests	set of nonlinear equations of motion exist, ranging


218	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



from using wing theory to applying a Taylor's series 
expansion to force and moment parameters. A "Cat­ 
alog _of Existi?g Mathematical Models" (Hagen, 1983) 
provides _a primer on nonlinear models and  reporting 
of coefficients and data. The works of Abkowitz (1964 
1965), Strom-Tejsen (1965), Eda and Crane (1965) No: 
rrbin (1971), Goodman and Gertler (1976), and others 
should also be reviewed. Fedyayevsky (1964) devel­ 
oped a modular system based on physical relationships 
and the use of wing theory, and more recently, the 
Japanese	Mathematical	Modeling	Group	(MMG) 
through Kose (1982) and others has developed a similar 
modular model (Section 16 addresses these develop­ 
ments and the modular approach).
  The Abkowitz and Strom-Tejsen Taylor's expansion 
approach is herewith presented to give an understand­ 
ing of the development of this popular non-modular 
model. The approach is based on a restatement of 
Equation (6) to include rudder angle as follows:

/(u, v, r, U, V, i-, 6,)	(30)

  It is assumed in Equation (30) that the only impor­ 
tant forces and moments acting  on  the ship  induced 
by the rudder are those due to rudder deflection,  6R 
and that the for:ces an _moments produced on the ship 
as a result of 6R and 6R are negligible.
  The complete Taylor expansion of Equation (30) with 
terms up to the third order is as follows for X with 
similar expressions for Y and N.
  (As noted in Section 6.7, tight maneuvers involve 
large speed losses; hence, consideration of the X-equa­ 
tion constitutes a vital part of this section whereas it 
could legitimately be neglected in the earlier consid­ 
erations of linear maneuvers):

+ x.v + X;r + Xa6R] + i [Xuu6u 2
+ XvvV 2  + ..... + X6s6/   + 2Xuv6UV



 

Fig. 30 Three possible relationships between X and v



  Terms higher than third order are not included in 
Equation (31) because experience has shown that ac­ 
curacy is not significantly improved by their inclusion. 
Furthermore, practical limitations of measurement 
techniques and the state of refinement of present the­ 
ory do not justify the inclusion of higher order terms. 
As a consequence of the geometrical symmetry of 
ships about the xz-plane, the relationship between X 
and v, for example, must correspond in general form 
to one of the three relationships shown in Fig. 30. The 
feature common to all three relationships is that they 
are symmetrical about the ordinate X. If the relation­ 
ship between X and v as depicted by curves 1 or 3 of 
Fig. 30 is to be expressed as an expansion in powers 
of v beyond the first power, then only the even powers 
of v can appear in the expression and the coefficients 
of the odd powers must be zero. That is, Xis an even
function of v which takes the form:


            (32)
where
                 a2 = ½Xvv; a 4 = 1/24Xvvv, etc., from Equation (31)
Again, as a result of symmetry about the xz-plane, 
Abkowitz (1964) shows that Xis also an even function
of r, 6R, v and r, that is,



                      (31)


X(r) = b2r 2 + b4 r 4 + b6 r 6 + .. .
X(6R) = C26R2 + C 6R4 + c 6R6 + .. .


(33)
(34)


where X0 is the force in the x-direction at the equilib­ 
rium condition, that is, u1 = V
  

It follows from the previous analysis that cross­ 
coupled terms in Equation (31) such as Xvuv6u,


CONTROLLABILITY	219



Xrur6u, X8u6	u , X= v8 6u , Xrrrur 8 6u , and so on, in­ 
volving odd powers of v, r, and BR are also zero. How­ 
ever, cross-coupled terms such as Xwuv 2 6u, Xrrur 2 6u, 
Xasu6R2 Bu, and so on, are nonzero because they involve 
even powers of v, r, and 6R. Also, terms such as Xvrvr, 
XvaVaR, Xr(jr6R, Xvruvr6u, and Xr(Jur6R6u are nonzero 
because they involve even-powered products of v, r, 
and 6R (see also Section 8.6).
  In contrast to X, the expressions for Y  and  N  are 
odd functions of v, r, 6R v, and r; that is, only the
coefficients of the terms in the expansion with odd 
powers are non-zero; those with even powers are zero. 
Odd functions are like those shown in Figs. 6, 8, 11, 
and 13 where in all cases the graph of the function is 
reflected about the origin. The expansion of Y or N as
a function of v, r, 6R, v, or r is typically as follows:
Y(v) = div  + d8 v8  + d sV 5   +  . . .	(35)
Y(6R)  = e1 BR  + esB/  + es6/  + . . .	(35a)

  Although superficially it appears that there should 
be a correspondence between the relationship of Y to 
v shown in Equation (35) and the relationship of X to 
u, in reality they are vastly different, for several rea­ 
sons. One is that the equilibrium value of v, designated 
v1 in Section 3, is taken as zero. (Any asymmetry due 
to  propeller  rotation  is  neglected for this restricted
purpose but is taken account of later in Equations (37) 
and (38).)	·



ing considerations into account, the equation for X
becomes:

where


+ ½Xvvuv26u  + ½Xrrur 2 6u   + ! Xaau6 R2 6u
+ (Xvr + a)vr + Xvav6R + Xr(jrBR + Xvruvr6u
+ XvauV6R6u + Xr(Jur6R6u
  The relationship between Y or N and 6u corresponds 
to that shown in curve 2 of Fig. 30 for X versus v. 
That is, because of symmetry about the xz-plane, Y(u)
= N(u) = 0 and  the  derivatives  Yu,  Yuu,  Yuuu, Y,,, 
N,,, Nuu, Nuuu, and Nu are all zero.
  As stated earlier, Y and  N  are odd  functions  of  v, 
r, 6R, v, and r. It follows that all the cross-coupled 
terms in the complete Taylor expansion of Y and N
involving even powers or even-powered products of v, 
r, 6R, v,and rare zero. Thus YvvuV2 6u , yrrur 2 6u , Yvrvr, 
Yvav6R, Yr(jrBR, YvruvrBu, YvauV6 u, etc., and similar 
terms for N, are all zero.
  The Y-force and N-moment induced by the rotation 
of a single propeller or by unirotating multiple pro­


The equilibrium value of u, u1
equal to


is not zero but is


pellers,  at  v  =  6R  =  0,  
identified  as  Yo and  N° in
Equation  (26) must, of course, be 
included  in the non­


the ship velocity, V. Another reason is that
the X-force is the component along the x-axis of the 
difference between two oppositely directed forces 
namely, the ship resistance and the propeller thrust'. 
whereas the Y-force is the component of a direct hy­ 
drodynamic force. For these reasons and others, X is 
neither an odd nor an  even  function  of  u  but rather 
its expansion includes all powers of 6u.
  Additional terms of the nonlinear equations can be 
eliminated by considering the nature of acceleration 
forces. Abkowitz (1964) states that no second or higher 
order acceleration terms can be expected, on the as­ 
sumption that there is no significant interaction be­ 
tween viscous and inertia properties of the  fluid and 
that acceleration forces calculated from potential the­ 
ory when applied to submerged bodies give linear 
terms.  Hence  all  terms  such  as  X,,,,it2 ,    Xvvv2 ,    X;,;r, 
X,;,;,;u 3 and so on, of Equation (31) are taken as zero.


linear equations for Y and N. In addition, since Yo and 
N° are likely to be speed dependent, the following 
terms are also taken as nonzero in the Taylor expan­ 
sion:

  The Y-force and N-moment induced by propeller ro­ 
tation at v ¢ 0, also discussed in Section 17.9 (see Fig. 
253), as well as their speed dependency,  are included 
in the followng nonzero terms in the Taylor 
expansion:

Following Abkowitz's  reasoning as noted in the dis­


Since X. and X, are also zero because  of  symmetry, 
the only acceleration derivative that is not  taken  as 
zero in the nonlinear equation of motion for Xis X,,, 
which is also the only acceleration derivative that ap­ 
pears in the linear equation for X (10).
  Combining the nonlinear Taylor expansion for X, 
Equation (31) with the dynamic response terms of the 
X-equation, Equation (5), and taking all of the preced-


cussion of Equation (31) the only acceleration deriva­
tives not taken as  zero in the  nonlinear  expansion  of 
Y and N are  those  appearing  in the linear equations  
of motion. These are Y., Y,, N., and N,.
  Combining the third-order Taylor expansions for Y 
and N [similar to that shown for X in (31)], with the 
dynamic response terms of the Y and N-equations of 
Equation (5) and taking all of the preceding consid-


220	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



e_rations into account, the nonlinear equations of mo­ 
tion for Yand N are as follows: Y-Equation:

            (37)
N-Equation:


du
dt	U1[t, u(t), v(t), r(t), 6R(t)]

dv
dt	U2[t, u(t), v(t), r(t), 6R(t)]

dr
dt	UaU, u(t), v(t), r(t), 6R(t)]





(40)


-   N.v   + (I. -  N,)r  = fa(u, v, r, 6R)	(38)
where
JAu, v, r, 6R) = Yo + Y,,°6u + You,.6u 2 + Yvv
+ ¼ y wvv3 + ½ y vrrvr 2 + ½Y vasV6R 2 +	yvuv6u

 





where u(t), v(t), r(t), and 6R(t) are the instantaneous 
values of u, v, r, and 6R at any time, t.
  Equation (40) is a set of three first-order differential 
equations for which approximate numerical solutions 
are readily obtained on a digital computer. The key to
the numerical solution is that values of u, v, and r at 
time t + 6t are obtained from knowledge of the values 
of u, v, r, and 6R at time t using a simple first-order 
expansion; that is,

u(t + 6t) = u(t) + 6tu(t)





 


fa(u, v, r, 6R) = N° + N u0 6u + N°....6u 2 + Nvv


v(t + 6t)  = v(t) + 6tv(t)
r(t + 6t) = r(t) + 6tr(t)


(41)


+ ¼Nvvvv3 + ½Nvrrvr2 + ½NvasV6/ + Nvuv6u
+ ½N vuuv6u2 + Nrr + ¼Nrrrr
+ ½N,..,,,,rv2 + ½N r8sr6 2 + Nrur6u + ½N ru,.r 6u 2



  An equation similar to Equation (38) could also be 
developed for the roll moment, K, which could be used 
to solve for the heel angle, cf>, as a function of time.
  Equations (36), (37) and (38) can be solved simulta­ 
neously for the accelerations u, v, and r, as follows:
.	Ii (u, v, r, 6R)
u=	(A - X,.)
v=	(1, - N,)f.i(u, v, r, 6R) + Y;-/a(u, v, r, 6R)
(A - Y.) (I. - N;-) - N.Y,

r =	(A - Y.)J.(u, v, r, 6R) + N.f.i(u, v, r, 6R)
(A - Y.)(I. - N,) - N. Y,
(39)
These solutions can be rewritten in the form:


This method is found to give adequate  accuracy  for 
the present type of differential equations because the
accelerations u, v, and r vary but slowly with time,
owing to the large mass or inertia of a  ship compared 
to the relatively small forces and moments  produced 
by its control surface. Any desired accuracy of the 
solutions can be obtained with a computer by using 
smaller time intervals 6t.
  The mathematical model has been developed in di­ 
mensional form. The equations are equally valid in 
nondimensional form with the stipulation that the ve­ 
locity used for nondimensionalization should be the 
velocity at any time, t, but not the initial velocity. For 
further simplification, the nondimensionalizing veloc­ 
ity in the nonlinear equations is taken  as u(t) rather 
than V(t)
  One reason cited in this chapter for non-dimension­ 
alization is that the nondimensional derivatives are 
independent of speed. The extent to which this as­ 
sumption is not true for nonlinear maneuvers is taken 
account of in Equations (36), (37), and (38) by the in­ 
clusion  of  such  terms  as  Y ,    Y    ..,  Y:,,,  Y:,,,.,  Y ,., 
Y ""' and so on, which represent the changes in the 
nondimensional derivatives Y;, Y;, Y with speed.
  Assuming that a full set of hydrodynamic coeffi­ 
cients (X:,	Y , etc.) is available, and that 
the rudder deflection 6R is defined as a  function  of 
time, the first step in the calculation of  the  trajectory 
of a ship would be to set the values of  u,  v, r, and 6R 
at time t = 0. In the most usual case u, v, and 6R at


CONTROLLABILITY	221



t = 0 would be zero and u would be equal to u1•    Having 
done this, u, v,and r can be calculated from Equations
(39) and the new velocities  at  time  t  = 6t  can  be ob­
tained from Equations (41). The process is then re­ 
peated using the new values for u, v, r, and 6R in 
Equations (39) and so on. The values of the velocities 
at a time t are thus obtained from
t-8t
u(t) = u(O) +	u(T) 6t
T-0



rudder moves with a constant rate of deflection, BR, 
determined in accordance with condition 2 of Section 
9.2, and that there is a fixed time lag between the 
instant that rudder deflection is ordered and the instant 
that the rudder begins to move (see item (d) of Section 
5.1). A rudder deflection up to a certain maximum 
angle 6R would be simulated in a computer program as 
fol­ lows:
Until t > tllag + ta



t-8t
v(t) = v(O) +	·v(-r) 6t
T-0



(42)



t-Bt
r(t) = r(O) +	r(T) 6t
T=O

where u(O), v(O), and r(O) are the values of u, r, and 
v at t = 0 and T represents intermediate values of  
time (between time O and time t - 6t) at which the 
accelerations u(t), v(t), and r(t) are determined.
  The instantaneous values of the linear velocities of 
the ship relative to earth axes (which are  needed  to 
plot trajectories) instead of relative to ship axes are 
obtained from Equation (3).re-expressed as:

Xoa(t) = u(t) cos if,(t) - v(t) sin if,(t)
(43)


 


  A rudder function of this type gives a very close 
approximation to the actual time history of a ship's 
rudder  when  a  maneuver  is ordered  from  the 
bridge.
  8.2	Captive Model Tests. Captive model tests in 
tanks are now carried out using a planar motion mech­ 
anism (PMM) or a rotating arm. In either case  the 
model is tested over a suitable range of important 
variables such as drift angle, yaw rate, sway accel­ 
eration, yaw acceleration, propeller RPM and rudder 
angle, and the results are analyzed to obtain the hy­ 
drodynamic coefficients required in the equations of


y00 (t )  = u(t) sin if,(t) + v(t) cos if,(t)


motion. Development of the linear 
coefficients will be
addressed first.
For design of a control surface, 
knowledge of the


where Xoo(t) and 'i100 (t) are the components of the in­ 
stantaneous resultant velocity of the origin, 0, of the 
ship along a fixed set of earth axes x0 and Yo, respec­ 
tively.
The instantaneous coordinates of the path of the


lift, drag and center-of-pressure location as a 
function of angle of attack, velocity, and control-
surface con­ figuration as given in Section 14 is 
adequate for most
practical problems. Knowledge of the forces and 
mo­ ments generated by control-surface rate of 
deflection,


origin of the ship x00 (t) and y00 (t ) relative to the fixed 
set of earth axes and the orientation of the ship, if,(t), 
can then be obtained by integration of the last of Equa­ 
tions (42) and (43). These are as follows:

t-8t
if,(t) = if,(O) +	r(T) 6t
T=O

t-llt
Xo0   (t)  = Xo0  (0)  +     V('T)  COS  if,(T)
T=O

+ [u(T) + u(O)] sin if,(T)} 6t	(44)
t-8t
Yoo(t) = Yoo(O) + {[u(T) + u(O)] COS if,(T)
T=O

- v(T) sin if,(T)} 6t
  There remains the question of defining the rudder 
deflection as a function of time. It is assumed that the


Be and angular acceleration,	t are only occasionally
important to the design of the steering engine that 
deflects the control surface and rarely, if ever, to 
the motion of the ship v.s. the control-surface 
system as a whole. However, it was found in 
Equation (14a) that to determine whether a ship is 
stable or unstable in straight-line motion, one must 
know not only the forces and moments generated by 
angle of attack on the ship, but also those generated 
by angular velocity. In ad­ dition to these, the 
forces and moments generated by linear and angular 
acceleration must be known in order to determine the 
magnitude of the stability indexes, Equation (14) or 
to compute the trajectory of a ship from the 
equations of motion.
  The experimental techniques necessary to measure 
the significant forces and moments generated by a 
ship's hull are much more elaborate and sophisticated 
than those necessary to measure the significant con­ 
trol-surface forces. Only in the case of the determi­ 
nation of the velocity-dependent derivatives of the 
hull is the experimental technique similar in principle  
to that used to determine control-surface forces and 
mo-


222	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



111111111




TANK 
CENTERLINE


sin
ce 
the 
un
de
fle
cte
d 
ru
dd
er 
co
ntr
ib
ute
s 
sig
nif
ica
ntl
y 
to 
the 
de
riv
ati
ve
s 
the 
m
od
el 
tes
ts 
sh
ou
ld 
als
o 
inc
lu
de 
the 
ru
dd
er 
in 
the 
am
ids
hi
p 
po
siti
on
.
T
h
e 
te
c
h
ni
q
u
e  
ju
st 
d
es
cr
ib
e
d  
ca
n 
al
so 
b
e 
us
e
d   
to
·!	
	det
er
mi
ne 
the 
co
ntr
ol 
der
iva
tiv
es 
Ya 
an
d 
Na
. If 
in 
Fi
g. 
31 
the 
mo
del 
we
re 
ori
ent
ed 
wit
h 
zer
o 
an
gle 
of 
att
ac
k,
/3, 
to 
the 
flo
w 
but 
the 
mo
del 
we
re 
to
we
d 
do
wn 
the 
tan
k 
at 
var
iou
s 
val
ues 
of 
rud
der 
an
gle 
BR
, 
the 
dy
na
mo
me
ter 
me
asu
re
me
nts 
wo
uld 
det
er
mi
ne 
the 
for
ce 
Y 
an
d 
the 
mo
me
nt 
N 
as 
a 
fun
cti
on 
of 
rud
der 
an
gle
. 
Plo
ts 
of 
the
se


llllllllllllllll//ll/lllllll
Fig. 31 Orientation of model in towing tonk to determine Y and N (Abkowitz, 
1964)

ments as used for this purpose in a modern wind tunnel 
(Whicker, 1958), or by Joessel in the river Loire in 1873 
(Van Lammeren, et al 1948).
  8.3	Straight-Line Tests in a Towing Tank. The ve­ 
locity-dependent derivatives Yv and Nv of a ship at any 
draft and trim can be determined from  measurements 
on a model of the ship, ballasted to a geometrically 
similar draft and trim, towed in a conventional towing 
tank at a constant velocity, V, corresponding to a given 
ship Froude number, at  various  angles of  attack,  /3, 
to the model path. Fig. 31 indicates the orientation of 
the model in the towing tank. From  this orientation  it 
is seen that a transverse velocity component, v, is pro­ 
duced along the y-axis such that:
v  =  -V   sin /3
where the negative sign arises because of the sign 
convention adopted in this chapter, Fig. 2.
  A dynamometer at the origin, 0,  measures the force 
Y and the moment N experienced by the model at each 
value of /3 tested. These measurements are then plot­ 
ted as a function of v (Fig. 10) and the slopes of the 
curves taken at v = 0, give numerical values for the 
derivatives Y" and N. for the model. These values can 
be reduced to nondimensional form by dividing by the 
proper combination, given in Section 3.4, of model 
length L, model speed V, and towing-tank water den­ 
sity, p. The dimensional ship values of the derivatives 
can then be obtained by multiplying the nondimen­ 
sional derivatives by the same respective combinations 
of ship length, ship speed, and seawater density.
  With reference to Equation (10), it is not really nec­ 
essary that the origin,  and  hence  the  dynamometer, 
be located at the center of gravity of model. The results 
are independent of the location of G. Rather it is most 
convenient that the origin and the dynamometer be
located at 00 so that x00 = 0. If  the dynamometer  is 
not located at 00, the derivative N. should be corrected 
so that it applies to O at 00-
  As described in Section (17), the propeller will usu­ 
ally exert an important influence on the hydrodynamic 
derivatives. Therefore, model tests to determine these 
derivatives should be conducted with propellers op­ 
erating, preferably at the ship propulsion point. Also,


against rudder angle would thus indicate the values of 
the derivatives  Y8   and Na. In addition to these im­ 
portant data, comparison of the values of Ya and 
NaBR obtained by this means at any given rudder 
angle with the values obtained from Equation (120) at 
/3R = 0 using isolated control-surface lift and drag data 
would indicate the magnitude of the interaction effects 
aris­ ing because of the close promixity of the rudder 
to the hull.
  Straight-line tests in a towing tank can also be used 
to determine the cross-coupling effect of v on Ya and 
Na and of 8R on Y. and N•. While such information is 
inadmissible within the context of the linear  theory, it 
is important for the nonlinear theory. Also for the 
purpose of this theory, knowledge  of the shape of  the 
Y versus BR, Y versus v, N versus BR and N versus v 
curves at large values of v and 8R will be of importance.
  8.4	Rotating-Arm Technique. To measure the ro­ 
tary derivatives YT and NT on a model, a special 
type of towing tank and apparatus called a rotating-
arm facility is occasionally employed. In this 
facility, an angular velocity is imposed on the model 
by fixing it to the end of a radial arm and rotating 
the arm about a vertical axis fixed in the tank as seen 
in Fig. 32. The model is oriented with its x-axis and 
z-axis normal to


---.  ....... +Nr,
 	v•u,
13•0;v•0


CIRCULAR
PATH  OF MODEL


















Fig.  32     Orientation  of  model  in  rototing-orm  facility  to  determine  Y, and
N  (Abkowitz, 
1964)


CONTROLLABILITY	223



the radial arm and it is attached to the arm preferably  
at the model's midlength. As a result of this particular 
orientation, as the model revolves about the tank axis, 
rotates at rate r while its transverse velocity compo­ 
nent v is at all times  zero (yaw angle  of  attack  /3 = 
0), and its axial velocity component  u 1  is identical to 
its linear speed. The model is rotated at a constant 
linear speed at various radii, R, and a dynamometer 
measures the force Y and the moment N acting on the 
model. Since the angular velocity r is given by


the only way to vary r at constant linear speed is to 
vary R. Typical plots of the resulting measurements 
(after model inertial effects are deducted) are shown
in Fig. 12 and the derivatives Yr and  Nr are  obtained 
by evaluating the slopes at r = 0. Because of ship 
symmetry, the values of Yr and N, at the  negative 
values of  r shown  in Fig. 12 are  a  reflection  of  their
values at positive r but with opposite sign.
  The model must be ballasted so that it floats at the 
proper draft and trim. Since the rotating-arm tests are 
conducted with r = 0, the results of rotating-arm tests 
are independent of the model radius of gyration. If the
radial arm shown in  Fig. 32 is attached  to the  model 
at its midlength, a distance Xe from the longitudinal 
center of gravity of the model, then the dynamometer 
measurements will yield values for (N, -=- Axe u 1 ) and



(Y, - Au 1 ) . Since values of A, Xe and u 1 are known  for 
the model, the dynamometer measurements can be used 
to determine the hydrodynamic derivatives N, and Yr. 
Values of these hydrodynamic derivatives for the full-
scale ship can be determined from their nondi­ 
mensional values. For the same reasons as indicated in 
the model tests for Nv and Yv, the model used in the 
rotating-arm tests should have the rudder in the 
amidship position and the propellers operating at the 
ship propulsion point.
In contrast to the results of the towing tank test
for Y,, and Nv, the results of the rotating-arm tests are 
dependent on the location of the center of gravity of the 
model. If, however, the procedure described in the 
preceding paragraph is followed, the model center of 
gravity need not be located at the same geometrical 
position as the G of the ship. The latter position is, of 
course, dependent on the condition of loading of the 
ship and needs to be known for insertion in the equa­ 
tions of motion of the full-scale ship. If the radial arm 
shown in Fig. 32 is not attached to the model at the 
midlength, the results should be corrected to the mid­ 
length position.
  The rotating-arm facility can also be used to deter­ mine 
Y,, and Nv as well as Y, and N,. This is accom­ plished by 
towing the model at a variety of values of
/3 for each r-value, not just at /3 = 0 as in Fig. 32.
These tests should include both plus and minus values of 
r. By cross plotting the values of Yv and Nv obtained at 
each r-value against  r,  the values  of  Yv and  Nv at r = 0 
can be obtained. Within the range of values of




 

Fig. 33 Rotating Arm Facility  at  Davidson  Laboratory,  Stevens  Institute,  is 
the first of its kind, is about 22m (70 ft) in diameter


224	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


tating arm facility, a device known as a Planar Motion 
Mechanism (PMM) was developed for use in the con­ 
ventional long and narrow towing tank to measure the


+x, -1-U




+Y


velocity-dependent derivatives, Yv and 
Nv, the rotary derivatives Yr and Nr, 
as well as the acceleration de­ rivatives 
N,, Y,, Y, and N,. This apparatus, 
described by Gertler (1959) and 
Goodman (1960), was developed at 
the David Taylor Research Center to 
determine sub­


Fig. 34 Model setup for plonor motion tests (Abkowitz, 1964)


r in which linear theory is applicable, this cross plot 
should show that Yv and Nv are substantially indepen­ 
dent of r. Values of the control derivatives Ya and Na 
can also be obtained from rotating-arm tests in a man­ 
ner exactly analogous to that just described for Yv and 
Nv. Unfortunately values of Ya, Na, Yv and Nv obtained


marine derivatives in the horizontal and  vertical 
planes. Subsequently by similar devices, 
described by Strom-Tejsen (1964), Paulling and 
Sibyl, (1962), and Van Leeuwen (1964), were 
developed elsewhere for surface ship models.
  Basically the PMM consists of two oscillators,  
one of which produces a transverse oscillation at 
the bow and the other a transverse oscillation at 
the stern while the model moves down the 
towing tank at a constant


in this manner do not always agree with values ob­


velocity u as measured along the centerline of the


tained from straight-line tests.
  For the purposes of the nonlinear  theory discussed  
in Sections 8.1 and 8.6, the rotating-arm facility can 
provide not only values of the hydrodynamic  forces 
and moments at large values of r, v, and 6R but also 
information on the cross coupling between these three 
parameters. Furthermore, with sufficient components 
the dynamometer used in the rotating-arm experi­ 
ments can also be used to  measure  the X-force  and 
the roll moment, K, as a function of r, v and 6R. These 
are needed with nonlinear theory to predict speed loss 
and heel during maneuvers. If  the  model  at  the  end 
of the rotating arm is tested at various heel' angles,
4>, as well as at various values of r, v, and 6R, the
nonlinear effects of heel and the cross-coupling effects 
between 4>, r, v and 6R can be obtained.
  A major drawback associated  with  rotating-arm 
tests is that they require a specialized facility of sub­ 
stantial size; they cannot be conducted in the long 
narrow tank conventionally used for resistance and 
propulsion testing. There are only a few rotating-arm 
facilities in the world. The largest in this country is at 
the David Taylor Research Center, Carderock, Md., 
with a diameter of 80 m (260 ft). See Fig. 33 for a view 
of the apparatus at Davidson Laboratory.
  Other problems associated with the rotating-arm 
technique are:
  (a)	The model must be accelerated and data ob­ 
tained within a single revolution. Otherwise, the model 
will be running in its own wake and its velocity with 
respect to the fluid will not be accurately known.
  (b)	In order to obtain values of the derivatives Yr, 
Nr, Yv and Nv at r = 0, data at small values of rare 
necessary. This means that the ratio of the radius of 
turn, R, to the model length, L, should be large. For 
large models, a large facility is required. Smaller 
models may use a smaller tank, but models too small 
will lead to scale effects in the ship prediction.
  8.5	Planar Motion Mechanism ("PMM") Tech­ 
nique. In order to avoid the large expense of a ro-


towing tank. The subscript zero is used here to 
des­ ignate the velocity  component  measured 
along the x0- axis fixed in the earth, i.e., in the 
towing tank. There­ fore, the magnitude of the 
resultant velocity vector V  of the model is not 
strictly speaking a constant in the planar motion 
tests. However, for the small motions admissible 
within linear theory, V:::::: Uo.
  The PMM, however, is more than a 
mechanical means of oscillating a model in a 
prescribed manner. The transducers used to 
measure the forces on the model, and the 
special instrumentation required for the proper 
resolution of the forces, are vital parts of the 
PMM.
The setup for planar  motion tests is shown  in Fig.
34. Near the bow a point B, located a distance x. 
for­ ward of the origin 0, (preferably taken at 
00) is os­ cillated transversely  with a small 
amplitude  a0  and at angular   frequency   w.  
Point  S  near  the  stern  at an
identical  distance,  x., aft   of  the  origin  is oscillated
traversely with the same amplitude, av, and the 
same frequency, w. The phasing of the 
oscillation of the stern relative to that of the 
bow can be adjusted and is indicated  by the 
phase angle E. If  E  = 0, the model









2W
Fig. 35 Poth ond orientation of model from determining velocity 
and linear acceleration dependent derivatives-pure sway motion 
(Abkowitz, 1964 and Gertler, 1959)


CONTROLLABILITY	225















y•O
v= -t- o w
v=O 0















 	IN PHASE 
WITH	



ues and, 
as was 
shown in 
Section 
4.2, Yv, 
for 
example, 
is always 
negative. 
Because 
of  the  
oscillator
y  nature 
of both 
YB and 
Ys, they 
can be 
either 
positive 
or neg­ 
ative, 
hence the 
alternate 
sign 
designatio
n is 
essential. 
The sign 
of Nv, 
which can 
be either 
positive 
or nega­ 
tive, will 
be 
determine
d from 
Equation 
(46) 
according 
to 
whether 
the 
absolute 
magnitud
e of YB is 
greater or 
less than 
Y8 • If YB 
is greater, 
Nv will be 
negative 
and vice 
versa. 
With the 
PMM, the 
proper 
signs are 
ob­
tained 
directly 
by 
establishi
ng a 
given 
sign 
conventi
on 
initially 
in the 
electroni
c 
measurin
g 
equipme
nt.


yc+ao
v•O
v= - o,,w2


y•O
v=-o w
Va:0
  

In order to 
obtain the 
coefficients of 
the linear ac­ 
celeration terms 
of Equation 
(10), the in-
phase ampli­


Fig. 36   Transverse  linear  velocity  and  acceleration  of  model corresponding 
to Fig. 35 (Abkowitz, 1954 and Gertler, 1959)



experiences an oscillation in pure sway with zero yaw, 
as shown in Fig. 35. The sway oscillation is of the 
form:


tudes of Y8 and Y8 must be measured,  since, as  shown 
in Fig. 36, these correspond to the times when iJ is a 
maximum and v = 0. The relationships for these coef­ 
ficients are:


(47)


Yo = Y  = a0
dy


cos wt




(45)


N,  _ Axe=	+  [(YB)in-
	(Ys)m]X,
-	-w2ao
where the subscript "in" refers 
to the amplitudes of


dt  =  v =  -  a0 w sin wt

d2y	.
-	= v = -  a0 w2  cos wt 
dt 2
  Two dynamometers located at B and S in Fig. 34 
measure the oscillatory Y-forces experienced by the 
model as a result of its swaying motion. These are the 
forces, YB and Y8 • As shown in Equation (45), the 
velocity v is a sine function, 90 deg out of phase with 
the displacement y0 , (or y) and the acceleration, iJ, both 
of which are cosine functions. Hence the measure­ 
ments of YB and Y8 taken when the time variable has


YB and Ys taken in phase with the displacement, Yo•
  The remarks concerning the use of the ± signs made 
with regard to Equation (46) apply also to Equation
(47)	as well as to Equation (49) to be developed sub­ 
sequently.
In order to obtain the rotary derivatives  Yr and Nr
from planar motion tests, the measurements must be 
made when r = 0, v =  0, and  v =  0. Similarly  for 
Y,  and N,,  the measurements  must  be  taken  when 
r
= 0, v = 0, and v = 0. In order to impose an angular 
velocity and an angular  acceleration  on the body with 
v and v both equal to zero, the model must be towed 
down the tank  with the centerline of  the model 
always


values  90 deg out of  phase with the displacement,  y  ,	tangent to its path, Fig. 37. This means that the v­


are forces arising from the effects of v  and  not from 
the effects of iJ since the latter is zero at these times. 
This is shown in Fig. 36. The velocity-dependent de­ 
rivatives Yv and Nv are then obtained from the follow­ 
ing relationships:
y=	aY= ± (Ys)out + (Ys)out
V	av	-aoW


component of the resultant velocity, V, is always 
zero, which is not the case in the situation shown in 
Fig. 35. However, the velocity, which strictly 
speaking is held constant in the experiment depicted 
by Fig. 37, is u0 just as it was in Fig. 35.


N   =	aN= ± [(YB)out - (Ys)ouJx.
V	av	-aoW


(46)


where the subscript "out" refers  to the amplitudes  of 
YB and Y8 taken 90 deg out of phase with the dis­ 
placement Yo•
For  both  Yv and  Nr, the positive sign in front of the
expression should always be associated with the case 
when Y8 is positive and the negative sign when YB is 
negative.  This is necessary  because  the amplitude  a0 
and the frequency w are always taken as positive val-









Fig. 37 Path and orientation of model for determining rotary and angular 
acceleration dependent derivatives-pure yawing motion (Abkowitz,  1964 
and  Gertler, 1959)


226	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



  Whereas the motion shown in Fig. 35 is pure sway 
with zero yaw, that shown in Fig. 37 is pure yaw with 
zero sway, since sway is defined as a translation along 
the y-axis fixed in the model. Since r is set equal to 
zero for all time in Fig. 37, there is no motion along 
the y-axis fixed in the model; only along the y0-axis 
fixed in the towing tank and shown as the ordinate of 
Fig. 37. Since the y-axis is constantly oscillating in 
direction in Fig. 37, the ordinate of that figure can be 
identified only as the y0-axis whereas in Fig. 35, the 
ordinate could be identified as  both the y0 and y-axes. 
In order to achieve the kind of motion shown in Fig.
37, it has been shown by Goodman (1960) that the phase 
angle E  between  the bow and stern oscillators  (see Fig.
34) must satisfy the condition:
1 -	(::·Y
COSE=---
1 + (::·)
which is equivalent to the simpler expression:


where the amplitude of the yaw oscillation lj,0 as  
well as the frequency w are always taken as positive.
  The last equation shows that the results of the 
PMM tests are dependent on the model mass 
moment of inertia, and, hence its radius of 
gyration, as well as on the distance x0 • The 
procedure described in Section
8.4 for expanding the results of rotating-arm tests  to 
the full scale in the event that x0 / L is not the same 
between model and ship applies to the results of the 
PMM tests in the event that neither x0  nor  the  
radius of gyration is scaled properly. Thus, the 
longitudinal radius of gyration of the model need not 
be propor­ tional to that of the ship. The model must,  
of  course, be ballasted to the proper draft and trim 
and it should be self-propelled at the ship propulsion 
point with the rudder, in the amidship position, 
included.
  Caution is necessary in using the results of 
planar motions tests. Since the ship model is at the 
water surface, its oscillatory motions create waves 
whose properties depend on the frequency of wave 
genera­ tion. By testing at various frequencies 
with the PMM the frequency dependence of the 
derivatives can be determined. However, for many 
problems in maneu­


tan E /2


= -wx,
Uo


vering, 
we are 
most 
interes
ted in 
zero or 
very 
low 
freque
ncies. 
For 
examp
le, the 
maneu
ver of 
a ship


where x, in both cases  is the distance from  the origin 
of the model to each oscillator.
The yaw oscillation shown in Fig. 37 is of the form:
lJ, = -iJ,o cos (wt - e/2)

ijJ = r  =  + ij,0 w  sin (wt -   e/2)	(48)
iii = r = + iJJo w2 cos (wt - e/2)


going into a turn is at zero frequency. To 
determine the values of the derivatives at zero 
frequency from planar motion tests, it is necessary 
to plot the deriv­ atives against frequency and to 
extrapolate to zero frequency; hence, the 
desirability of testing at low frequencies. 
However, for many problems, including transient 
maneuvers and motions in rough seas, we are 
extremely interested in the extent to which the 
hydrodynamic derivatives are in fact frequency 
de­ pendent. For this information the planar 
motion tests are indispensable. Van Leeuwen 
(1964) presents ex­


where lj,0 is the amplitude of the yaw oscillation. In


tensive  plots of  the hydrodynamic  derivatives of a Se­
ries  60,  C8                  =  0.70,  model  as   a  function   of   both


Equation (48), r is out of phase with lj, and r is in phase 
with lj,. Therefore, the amplitudes of Y 8 and Ys mea­ 
sured 90 deg out of phase with lj, will determine the 
force and moment due to rotation, r, and the ampli­ 
tudes of Y8 and Y8 measured in phase with l/J will
determine the force and moment due to angular ac­ 
celeration, r. The force and moment derivatives with 
respect to r and r are then expressed as follows:


frequency of oscillation and ship speed.
  It should be noted that the values of the 
derivatives determined either in straight-line tests 
in the towing tank or on a rotating-arm facility are 
the values at zero frequency of oscillation. These 
should correspond to the values obtained from 
planar motion tests ex­ trapolated to zero 
frequency.
The PMM, like the rotating arm, can also be used


yr  _  ilU=i


+ (Ys)out + 
(Ys)out
-	-lJ,ow


to 
deter
mine 
nonli
near 
and 
cross
-
coupl
ing 
effect
s 
whic
h are 
essen
tial 
for 
the 
predi
ction 
of 
nonli
near 
ma­ 
neuv
ers. 
Samp
le 
result
s 
from 
PM
M 
exper
iment
s re­


Nr _ il:taUi= ± [(Ys)out + (Ys>out] X,
-iJ,ow
Y;- _ ilxa=	±[(Ys)in + (Ys)inJ
-iJ,ow2

 




(49)


lating Y and N to simultaneously large values 
of /3
and 6R are shown in Fig. 38 and related to 
the nonlinear equations of motion in 
Section 8.6. Similar results can also be 
obtained from the PMM not only relating  
Y and N to r as well as /3 and 6R, but also 
relating the longitudinal force Xto /3, 6R, 
and r. The PMM like the rotating arm can 
also be used to determine the rolling 
moment, K, as a function of /3, 6R, r, and 
<f>.
The use of model test data 
immediately suggests


CONTROLLABILITY	227
5.--------.----.----.----,---,----,

.
..;
0
"I-	-Tl""-==--+-"""'7'r----:-ir"-c.., 	'17'"""':. "t---O
w
0k ;:::::-a--¥S	,-s	:4=


Cl)
Cl)

i-1 =
in
; -  2	P   -	--:::-Jr''---t -r-t- -,	-,	1
0






0.51--+---+--+--+-	'M;;:-=""t- 	,.
ii5






-5L  ., 	., 	., 	., 	. 	....  .... 	,	 	


-40	-30	-20	-10	0	10	20	30	40
RUDDER ANGLE, cl'A IN DEG.
la)  Y'  vs  p  and d',.


-40	-30	-20	-10	0	10	20	30	40
RUDDER ANGLE, d',,_IN DEG.
lb)   N'  vs  f3  and 8-R


 Fig. 38 Y and N versus /3 and 6 for Mariner-class model (Chislett and Strom­ 
Tejsen, 1965). Curves fitted to experimental values by least-squares technique




the possibility of scale effects as introduced in the 
discussion of free-running models (Section 7.2). If the 
Froude number is satisfied, the Reynolds number will 
not be satisfied. However, in determining the Y-forces 
and N-moments, lift and circulation effects are involved 
and it is shown in Section 14.2 that there is very little 
scale effect on the slope of lift coefficient versus angle 
of attack. However, separation or breakdown of lift 
does occur at lower angles of attack at lower Reynolds 
number. For example Fig. 38 does show a decrease in 
the values of Yand Nat large values of  BR. This may 
be, but is not necessarily, evidence of stall. If the cause 
is stall, and it is suspected that stall in the full scale 
would occur at larger values  of  BR, the data  of  Fig. 
38 could be empirically corrected at large values of BR 
before using the data for predicting nonlinear maneu­ 
vers. In this way, errors in predictions of maneuvering 
characteristics due to premature stall of the model may 
be minimized.
  8.6	Evaluation of the Coefficients of the Nonlinear 
Equation of Motion.  All of  the derivative  coefficients 
of Equations (36), (37), and (38) with the exception of 
some of those involving u are best evaluated on the 
basis of experimental data obtained  from  captive 
model tests. For example, from experimental data like 
those given in Fig. 38 relating Y' and N' to BR and /3, 
all of the derivatives involving BR and v' in Equations
  (37)	and (38) may be determined. Similar experimental


data for X as a function of 6R and  /3 can also be used 
to determine all of the derivatives involvng  BR and v' 
in Equation (36).
  Starting with Y and Y  88 ,  the  first  step is to eval­ 
uate the coefficients e1 and es of the polynomial Equa­ 
tion (35a) so that it forms the best least-squares fit to 
the curve through the experimental data given in Fig. 
38(a) for /3 = 0. The coefficients, e1 and es, are related 
to Y'8 and Y 88 as follows through Equation (37):
e; = Y and e; = ¼Y aa
In an exactly analogous manner, the derivatives Y , 
Y:,,,,,, N , N 88 , N , and N:,,,,, may be determined rec­ 
ollecting that v' = - sin /3. Similarly, the derivatives 
Xw, Xrr, and X88 of Equation (36) can  be determined 
by fitting Equations (32), (33), and (34) to 
experimental data relating X to BR and /3.
The cross-coupled derivatives involving 6R and v'
may also be determined from data like those given in 
Fig. 38. For example, to determine  Y  w, the first step 
is to measure (Y )s=o from Fig. 38(a) for all given 
values of v' = -sin /3. The next step is to fit a poly­ 
nomial to these values of Y as a function of v'. Be­ 
cause all values of  Y  are  positive  and  also  because 
of symmetry port and starboard, Y   is an even function 
V ,' 1.e.,
Y (v) = h v'2 + h v'4 + ...


228	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE







Variable


Table 2-Assessment of 
the Coefficients in the 
X-Equation
R
e
l
a
t
i
v
e
 
I
m
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e
 
o
f
 
C
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
s
Value 
of 
Coeffic
ients	(see note 1)
             M
ariner		Series 60,	Strom-Tejsen	Eda and Crane Coefficient	Class	Model 5, 1, 1		(1965)		(1965)


u
Bu 
Bu 2
Bu 3
v2


a' - x
X'
½X..
ix ....
½X',,.


+0.177
-0.0253
+0.00948
-0.00217
-0.189


+0.175
	
A
	
B
A
A
	B
A
 
C


r2
Bk
v 2 Bu
r 2 Bu
BkBU


½X'" + m'x'c
	+0.0
0379	C
½X'aa	-
0.02	C	B
½X'"""	E
½X',...,.	E
½X'&a..	E


vrR 
vBR 
rB
vrBu
vBRBu 
rBRBu


X'"' + ti.'
X'vll
x·rll
x·,,,.,.
X'.,,,.
X'PI),.


+0.168	D	B
+0.0196	D
0	D
E
 
E
 
E


(X°)'	0	D	B
NOTE 1 The symbols  used in these two columns have the following meanings:  
A - Evaluated and deemed important.
B -  Evaluated  but no opinion  as  to importance. 
C - Evaluated  and deemed of  minor importance. 
D - Evaluated and deemed negligible.
E - Considered  but  not evaluated  since  deemed  negligible. 
No entry in these columns means the coefficient was ignored.
NOTE 2 All derivatives are nondimensionalized on basis of p, L, T, and V.



.
where h; = ½ Y vv, h = 0 for a third-order expansion.
For Y:,.,8 , the first step is to  measure  (Y )v-o  at  all 
given values of 6R on Fig. 38 and then proceed in the 
same way as described for Y vv; similarly for N:,.,8  and 
N vv- The cross-coupled derivatives x:r, X  and  X r 
can also be similarly determined from experimental 
data relating X to 6R and /J.
Fig. 38 applies  only to r'  =  0. Data  like   these  can
be obtained for all values of r' from either rotating­ 
arm or PMM tests. Given all these additional experi­ 
mental data, all the coefficients of Equations (37) and
(38)	involving v, 6R, and r may be derived. In addition, 
(Yo)' of Equation  (37) is the value of  Y'  at  /J = 6R = 
0 in Fig. 38(a) and (N') is the value of N' at /J = 6R
= 0 in Fig. 38(b).
  If, in addition, the prediction of heel angle during 
maneuvers is desired, experimental data like that 
shown in Fig. 38 are required, relating the rolling mo­ 
ment K to v, 8R, rand the heel angle <f,. The feasibility 
of obtaining these data was discussed in Section 8.4 
and 8.5.
The coefficients of the equation expressing the re-



lationship between X and u are best determined 
from the results of open-water propeller tests and 
ship re­ sistance data rather than from either 
rotating-arm or PMM tests. The reasons for this are 
outlined in the following.
  As long as a ship is moving in a straight line at 
constant speed, V = u 1 , the following relationship is 
true:
X = T(l - t) - R = 
0
where
T = propeller thrust
t = thrust deduction coefficient
R = total ship resistance
This equilibrium condition defines the initial propeller 
thrust and the corresponding propeller torque and rev­ 
olutions. However, as soon as a maneuver is initiated, 
this equilibrium condition is disturbed and the X-force 
varies as a function of speed. While R and t as func­ 
tions of speed may be obtained from ship resistance


 	 





and self-propulsion tests, the propeller thrust T as a 
function of u is dependent on the type of power plant 
and the power-plant settings that are maintained dur- 
ing a maneuver.
  For example, a diesel engine is essentially a con- 
stant-torque machine whereas a turbine is a constant- 
power machine. When a diesel ship enters a maneuver 
there is therefore a decrease in RPM and hence in 
thrust. On a turbine-driven ship, any reduction in RPM 
is accompanied by an increase in torque; hence, the 
reduction in thrust in a maneuver is less than on  a 
diesel ship (Fig. 44). These considerations governing 
the relationship between T and u are best taken ac- 
count of by means  of open-water  propeller  test  data 
as shown in Strom-Teisen (1965).
  Data from Strom-Teisen and Chislett (1964)for the 
Mariner Class model and from Eda and Crane (1965) 
for the Series 60, Model 5,1,1, corresponding most 
closely to the Mariner Class model are summarized in


Tables 2, 3 and 4. Both models are described in Table
5. An assessment of the importance of the various 
coefficients made in Strom-Teisen (1965) is also con- 
tained in Table 4. The two references do not  agree  as 
to the importance of the various derivatives.
  8.7	Sample Results of  Nonlinear  Model-Predic- 
tions.	The overall precision of the nonlinear model- 
prediction technique as developed by Strom-Tejsen 
(1965)and utilizing PMM experimental data from Chis- 
lett and Strom-Tejsen (1965)is shown in Figs. 39, 40, 
and 41. A comparison is made in these figures between 
the results of full-scale turning tests, zigzag and spiral 
maneuvers conducted with a Mariner Class ship 
(Morse and Price, 1961) and the prediction of the 
identical maneuvers made in Chislett and Strom-Teisen 
(1965). The overall agreement for all of these 
maneuvers is reasonably good except for the fact that 
the model prediction in Fig. 39 shows a small tendency 
to turn better to starboard whereas the full-scale ship 
shows


230

































a tendency  to  turn  better  to port.  The results of the		of the marginally stable ship were obtained by de- 
spiral  maneuvers  of Fig.  40 confirm these small op-		creasing the magnitude of y~, y~,and N~of the stable 
posite tendencies since, at zero rudder, the model pre-		ship by 10 percent and increasing the magnitude of 
diction  indicates  a  tendency  to  turn  to  starboard,		N'v of the stable ship by 10 percent. Similarly, the 
whereas  the  ship  tends  to  turn  to  port. This latter		derivatives of the unstable and very unstable ships 
tendency  is in accord with Section 17.9		correspond to 20 and 30 percent changes, respectively, 
Predicted data on the speed loss during the turning	from the stable ship. Also shown in Fig. 45 are the and 
zigzag  maneuvers  shown in Figs. 39 and 41 are		slopes of the r - 8R curves taken from Fig. 174 for
shown in Figs.  42 and 43. Three  conditions are shown	these  same  ships.  The  dimensional  slopes,  arla8R, on  
each  figure:  that  corresponding  to constant  RPM,	shown are obtained from  the  nondimensional slopes, 
as  prevails,   for   example,  in  the usual  free-running	ar' 1a8, given in Fig. 174 by multiplying the latter by 
model turning test; that corresponding to constant	V/L =  15 X  1.689/528  =  0.479, where  161m (528 ft) 
power,  as  for  a  turbine-driven   ship;  and that  corre-	is the length of the Mariner Class and 15 knots is the 
sponding to constant  torque,  as for a diesel-driven ship.	speed at 8R = 0 deg. The slopes correlate nicely with 
The RPM-speed relationships  for these  three cases are	the characteristics of the spiral maneuvers of the unst- 
shown in Fig.  44. It  is clear  from these  data that free-	able ships as predicted by the nonlinear model tech- 
running  model tests   seriously  underpredict the speed	niques.
loss in a turn  for either  a turbine  or diesel-driven ship,			8.8 Comparison of Experimental Techniques and 
whereas  the  prediction  method outlined in this section		Quasi-Steady Theory. Much  testing  and  correlation 
can  accommodate  realistically  the  effects of different		work has been accomplished with free running, and 
power  plants  on the speed loss.		captive model tests over the years. Free running and 
The ability  of the  nonlinear  model technique to pre-	captive model tests using a model of the Mariner-class 
dict  the  spiral  maneuvers  of  unstable  ships is shown		cargo ship  SS  Compass  Island  for which extensive in 
Fig.  45. As  noted  in Section  4.3, these  maneuvers		full-scale data are available (Morse and Price, 1961)
cannot  be predicted  by linear  theory.  The derivatives	have been collected and compared under the auspices


 	 



of the International Towing Tank Conference. Results 
of an investigative program concentrating on turning 
circles were reported at the Thirteenth Conference in 
1972 with favorable comparisons. The measurements 
of the linear force derivatives by various model test 
towing tanks using the rotating arm and PMM testing 
facilities have also been studied.
  Concern for frequency dependence in PMM testing 
and a desire to provide accurate predictions of extreme 
maneuvers, resulted in the development of larger am- 
plitude PMMs (LAPMM)such as that used at the Dan- 
ish tank. Smitt and Chislett (1974) Marine LAPMM 
results are compared with data from oblique towing 
tests and rotating arm tests (Smitt,  1975).This paper 
and a related one by Eda at the 1975 conference con- 
clude that comparable linear force data from carefully 
conducted rotating arm and PMM tests are essentially 
identical for the Mariner hull form.
  Development in the early 1970's of the high block 
(CB) tanker forms showing instability of flow around 
the ship stern caused concern for  the  effects of scale 
on maneuverability predictions. Numerous tests were 
consequently performed to verify the maneuvering ca- 
pability of such forms. Nomoto and Fujii report  on 
tests performed by several researchers addressing the 
scale problem (Burcher, 1975). Among the tests were 
those of Sato, et al (1973)who utilized a 30 meter free- 
running model in addition to 4 and 10 meter free run- 
ning models to investigate scale effects.
  Trials of the Esso Osaka discussed in Section  13 
have paralleled the Mariner trials as a standard for





















































maneuvering prediction correlation of a full form in 
both deep and shallow water (Crane, 1979).Numerous 
model towing tanks have tested models of the Osaka 
with good correlation. See "Model Test," (1980),Dand 
and Hood, (1983) and others.
  With regard to the validity of captive model tests, 
quasi-steady state theory is the basis upon which hy- 
drodynamic conditions of steady motions are assumed 
to apply in transient conditions. Burcher (1975) and


Nomoto (1975) provide discussion of the 
applicability of the theory particularly with 
reference to the oscil- latory derivatives 
obtained by PMM  experiments where the 
motion is induced by rudder deflection. It is 
difficult to justify the quasi-steady assumption 
on purely theoretical grounds but the method 
has been widely used in hydrodynamics and 
aerodynamics  and in practical terms appears to 
work.
  The use of captive model test data to develop 
coef- ficients in motion equations is assumed to 
be valid according to the quasi steady state 
theory  as  long as the motion is "slow." An 
expression such as Equation


CONTROLLABILITY	233


(12) for the forces due to sway motion, should be writ­ 
ten with each variable as a function of time.  Thus, 
these equations can be misleading if applied to ship




75,-- -----,------,c----,----.----r---.--
11>	MARINER HULL FORM
Z	APPROACH SPEED 15 KNOTS


and model motions indiscriminately. Bishop, Burcher 
and Price (1975) reported on investigations into the


0
.=..>,.w..


70 f----+--------'----!--+---+---+---+----.
 


time history effect in captive ship model testing. Nom­


O    => 65 f----+--.::....:....; 	. 
a:!s


--!'---+----l,., l!::.+----1-----l


oto (1975) concludes that
(J'JL
w'  =  -	=   2 to 2.5
V
may be the highest limit at which PMM tests can safely


ffiffi 60 f----+-i---l----t-=-il-,,,,£._+--+---+---1-----l
.....J,O.
....
55 F---+--...,.,..-,::_--+---!--+--+---+--1-----l
a:
0..


obtain the slow motion derivatives. The general indi­ 
cations concluded by Burcher are that frequency ef­


8	9	10	II	12	13	14
FORWARD VELOCITY IN KNOTS


15	16


fects do not play a significant part in the steered 
motions of ships in calm water.


Fig. 44 Change of propeller revolutions as function of speed-loss in ma­ 
neuvers for different types of power plants (Strom-Tejsen, 1965)



0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2


0
Cz
0
(.)-0.2
w
ell
a:
-0.4
II)
II.I
 
-0.6
C)

C
-0.8



C)


Cl
II.I


0
l&.I

:Crl
(.)



08

0.6

0.4


a..  0.2
0
w
1-
:	0

-0.2

-0.4


-0.6

-0.8
-20	-15	-10
STARBOARD
















-5	0	5
RUDDER ANGLE IN DEGREES



--
10	15	20	·20	-15	-
10	-5	0	5
PORT	STARBOAD	RUDDER ANGLE
IN DEGREES
















10	15	2C
PORT


Fig. 45 Results from prediction of spiral maneuvers for stable, marginally stable, and unstable hull forms; 15-knot speed at 6, = 0 deg (all derivatives
nondimensionalized on basis of p, L, T and \I) (Strom-Tejsen, 1965)


234	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Section 9
Theoretical Prediction of Hydrodynamic Coefficients and Systems Identification


  9.1	General. While experimental techniques as 
described in Section 8 allow measuring forces and mo­ 
ments in the nonlinear as well as the linear range of 
motions, the theoretical prediction of these forces and 
moments has not yet been refined, particularly for the 
nonlinear range. This section introduces the theoretical 
development of hydrodynamic coefficients for the lin­ 
ear range. Current developments in the calculation of 
coefficients including the "systems identification" ap­ 
proach are summarized in this section.
  One of the many assumptions made in linear theory 
is that the interference effects of the ship's hull on its 
appendages such as fixed fins and rudders and hull are 
negligible. While is it hard to justify this assumption 
on physical grounds and it is obviously not justified 
for tight maneuvers (see Section 6.4 and Fig. 22), it is 
shown in Section 6.4 that it and the other assumptions 
made in the linear prediction do lead to reasonable 
correlation with experimental data for small motions 
within the linear range.
  9.2	Contribution of Fixed Fins.  The contribution  of 
a lifting surface or fixed fin located  at  the  extremity 
of a ship's hull, several chord lengths from the origin


where Lf and Df are the lift and drag forces on the
fin. The signs of Lf, Df, and {31 ar e assumed to 
always be positive, hence, the necessity for 
the ± signs.
  The  derivative  of  Y   with  respect  to  vf  
taken  at vf = 0 is the fin velocity-dependent 
force derivative, (Yi)f:

                       (52)
where the negative sign in association with the 
abso­ lute magnitude symbol I I is necessary 
because as shown in Section 4.2, Yv is always 
negative.
From Equation (50):
(:t=	:fz	(53)
From Equation (51a)
(
!
 
t


of the ship, to the hydrodynamic derivatives of  that 
hull will be considered first. Such a fin could be a rudder 
held in the amidship position, the ship's deadwood aft 
or a foil located anywhere along the ship lengt . Al­ 
though the example treated deals with a fin a distance
+ xf  forward  from the origin, the formulation result­
ing from the forthcoming analysis gives the effect of 
such  a fin aft   of the origin  provided  a  negative value


(Yp)f = Lf sin {3f-


and for /3f = 0


cos /3f

-   Df  cos {3f -	(:\	sin /3f


ofIxf


is 
used
.
the 
body 
and 
fin 
show
n in 
Fig. 
46 
are 
initia
lly


(54)


travelling at a forward velocity u, and the body is given 
a transverse-velocity disturbance, +v, then the fin also 
experiences a transverse velocity of vf = v. For small 
values of vf relative to u, the angle of attack at the
fin, /3f, in radians is


The fin lift and drag can be expressed in 
terms of the lift and drag coefficients and the 
fin area, Af, as follows (see also Section 14.1):


                                     (50)
where uf is the forward velocity of the fin, and the 
resultant velocity


Lf   = (CLMpl2)AfV2
Di=	(CnM p l 2)Af V 2
and from Equation (55a):


(55a)

(55b)



(56)


 



  The Y-force and the N-moment produced by the fin 
as a result of this angle of attack are given by

            (51a)
(51b)


Substituting Equations (56) and (55b) into Equation
(54)	and Equations (54) and (53) into (52), one 
obtains finally for /3f = 0:



CONTROLLABILITY	235



---•1---
---------------
◆	V
+Y



ogous to x00 in Fig. 9, and neglecting 
the fin derivatives taken about the 
fin's own midlength (which are neg­ 
ligibly small), it follows from 
Equation (13) that:
(Y'r}f = X'1(Y'v}f	(59b)
and


Fig.  46     Fin arrangement  showing  forces and velocities  (Abkowitz,  1964)	(N'r')f


= x' f  2(Y'v')f	(59c)






  Values of the lift-curve slope, aCLI o/3, needed for 
insertion in Equation (57), may be estimated from 
Equation (122b) of Section (14.5) or from Abbott and 
Doenhoff (1958). A much simpler expression of rea­ 
sonable accuracy for very low aspect-ratio fins is the 
Jones' formula (Abbott and Doenhoff, 1958)
  

Equations (59a, b, and c) show that the contributions of a 
fixed fin to the velocity-dependent moment deriv­ ative and 
to the rotary derivatives are all functions of the fin velocity-
dependent force derivative (Y' v)1 . Sim­ ilarly, the 
contributions of a fixed fin to the acceleration derivatives  of  
a ship's  hull are functions  of the accel­
eration-dependent force derivative of the fin, (Y' . )1 . This 
derivative corresponds to the "added mass" of a flat plate 
for accelerations  perpendicular  to the plate
and may be approximated as follows:
,	_	1TpbA1	1


0 L =


(i) a (per radian)


(Y  ,)1-	-


(a/ +


½ X (p/2)L2T
1)
=



21Tb1 A'1




(60)


where a is the effective aspect ratio. This relationship 
is compared to (122b) Fig. 137 where it is seen that


(aG 2 + 1)½
where A1 is the area of the fin, bis the geometric span,


for a  <  0.5 and for sweep angle  A  =  0 the two  re­
lationships are in excellent agreement. (Note that the


and aG is its geometric aspect ratio b2 A1 . For a fin


values of aCL/ oa are per degree whereas values 
needed for insertion  in Equation  (57) are  per  radian.)
The drag coefficient (C v )1  at zero angle of _attack may


attached to a ship's hull so that its  effective  aspect ratio is 
2aG, (60) becomes:
,	_	21TpbA1	1


be estimated as essentially the  skin-friction  drag  of 
the fixed fin; however, it is usually so small in relation 
to aCLI o/3 that it is frequently ignored. Thus:
<Yv)1 = - I (p/2 )A 1 V ( L),I (	per radian)


(Y J-i   -	(4a/+ 1)½ X (p/2)L2T
41Tb'A'1	(61)
(a 2 + 1)½
from which it may  be seen  that for the limiting case of 
zero aspect ratio the "added mass" of a fin with its


and,  with  draft T introduced	(58)
(p/2)A  v (acL)


root chord adjacent to a bounding surface is twice that of 
the same fin without the bounding surface.
  The expressions for the contributions to the other 
acceleration derivatives of a fixed fin remote from the


(Y,v)-f  --    I


(p/i2)LTVa13 i I- --

 


IA , (aoc/3L)I

 


origin of 
the ship to 
which it is 
attached 
are exactly


I	I	analogous to Equations (59a, b, and c)



  Because of the prominence of the ship's draft, T, in 
the formulations of this and subsequent sections, it is 
often used  in association  with  the ship's length,  L, as 
a nondimensionalizing parameter.
Also, from Equation (51b)



 
(Y' ;-)1 = x'/Y' ,)1
(N';-)1 = (X'1)2(Y' ,)1


(62a)

(62b)

(62c)


(N'v)f  = (Y'v)1X'1	(59a)
from which it may be seen that (N v' )1 is positive (and 
hence stabilizing according to Table 1) if the fin is aft 
of the origin (x' 1 negative) and negative and destabi­
lizing if the fin 1s forward of the origin.
  The contribution of a fin to the derivatives  Y' r  and 
N'r  is readily calculable from the expressions devel­ 
oped in Section 4.2. Noting that x1 in Fig. 46 is anal-
  

The magnitudes of the fin acceleration derivatives 
determined from Equations (61) and (62) are generally 
small and of minor significance compared to the fin 
velocity and rotary-dependent derivatives. The contri­ 
bution that a fixed fin such as a rudder or deadwood 
makes to the latter derivatives is often decisive in 
determining whether a ship possesses control-fixed sta­ 
bility or not. This is further discussed in Section 16.2.


236	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



o) t..• o v=f>,
'·'tr.,.,] "	("• •.\,.,•.,.
RUyOoOER ),, 	-( -  +),,v(->:-_1,	_2!!£4._




---- ¢._


Fig. 47 Relationship between Y3 and (Y.l,



  9.3	Prediction of t'1e Control Derivatives. By treat­ 
ing the fixed fin of the previous section as a control 
surface, values of the control  derivatives  Y8  and  N8 
can be computed in the same manner as the fixed fin 
contributions (Yv )1 and (Nv )1 . It is clear from Fig. 47
that neglecting interference effects from the hull and
the propellers, the  net  effect of  both  a drift angle  /3 
at the stern and  a  control-surface deflection  angle 6c is 
to introduce an angle of attack on the control surface so 
that in both cases the slope of the nondimensional Y-
force versus angle of attack can be computed as a 
product of A' rand fJCLI fJa, that is,
(Y'.e>, = A, r (acL)
 
fJa I


derivatives of a ship's hull is even less well 
developed than that for predicting ship's 
resistance. What is pre­ sented in this section is 
a procedure for predicting the hydrodynamic 
derivatives using a combination of the­ oretical 
and empirical inputs.
  For the purposes of this section, the ship's 
hull may be viewed as a very low aspect-ratio 
fin of very large area. The geometric aspect 
ratio of the hull is its draft­ to-length ratio, its 
thickness-to-chord ratio is its beam­ to-length 
ratio, its taper ratio is  usually  close  to 1.0, its 
sweepback angle is usually  slightly  negative  
and its mean section shape corresponds to the 
shape of its water plane at half draft. At the low  
speeds  (Fn  < 0.25) where the influence of 
wavemaking may be neg­ lected and to which 
the current approaches are strictly limited, it 
was shown by Tsakonas (1959) that the free 
water surface serves as a groundboard for the 
ship's hull, hence, the effective aspect ratio of  
the  hull may be taken as 2T/ L. Because of its  
poor  section  shape as a lifting surface and 
because of its extremely low aspect ratio, it 
might be expected that a ship's hull would 
generate very small hydrodynamic forces and 
moments compared to its rudder; however, 
because of its very large profile area, a ship's 
hull does in fact generate forces and moments 
far larger than the con­ trol forces generated by 
its rudder.
  Viewed in this light, the velocity-dependent 
force derivative, (Yvh, for the bare hull is 
identical  in form to that of the fin (Yv)f given 
by (57):
(Yvh = -(p/2)AhV [( ;t + (Cv)h]	(64a)
where the subscript h refers to the  bare hull and  A,.


and



Y'a 
= 
A'c 
(ac
L)
fJa I



(acfJa
L 
per 
rad1" 
an)


(63a
)'


i
s
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
f
i
l
e
 
a
r
e
a
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
i
p
'
s
 
h
u
l
l
.
 
S
i
n
c
e
 
t
h
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
 
a
s
p
e
c
t
 
r
a
t
i
o
 
o
f
 
a
 
s
h
i
p
'
s
 
h
u
l
l
,
 
2
T
/
L
,
 
i
s
  
r
a
r
e
l
y
  
g
r
e
a
t
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
a
b
o
u
t
¼
,
 
t
h
e
 
J
o
n
e
s
 
f
o
r
m
u
l
a
  
s
h
o
w
n
  
i
n
 
F
i
g
.
 
1
3
7
 
i
s
 
o
f
 
a
m
p
l
e
 
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.
 
T
h
u
s
,


where fJCLI fJa may be estimated from Equation (122b). 
From the preceding


( Lt = (i) a = 1rTIL per radian	(65)



and since


Y's= (Y' 
.e )1

Y'.e = -
Y'v
Y's = -
(Y'v)f





(63b)



S
u
b
s
ti
t
u
ti
n
g 
t
h
i
s 
e
x
p
r
e
s
s
i
o
n 
i
n 
E
q
u
a
ti
o
n 
(
6
4
a
) 
a
n
d 
n
o
n
­ 
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
li
z
i
n
g 
o
n 
t
h
e 
b
a
s
i
s 
o
f 
p
, 
L
, 
T
, 
a
n
d 
V
, 
w
e 
o
b
t
a
i
n
:
(
Y'
J,
. 
= 
(
p
l
i 
=
-
( 
0
 + 
(C
v)
h	(64b)


And from Equation (59a) for x'1 = - ½
N's= -½Y's
  9.4	Prediction of the Bare Hull Hydrodynamic Deriv­ 
atives. It is shown in Chapter V that no adequate 
theory exists to predict the resistance of a ship in 
simple straight-line motion with zero angle of attack 
at constant speed; that to predict such resistance, one 
must resort to model data or to other empirical ap­ 
proaches. The theory for predicting the hydrodynamic


where (Cv)h may be obtained from the drag 
charac­ teristics of the ship at zero angle of 
attack.
  The velocity-dependent moment derivative 
of a ship's hull (Nv)h includes a  term that is 
negligible  for a fixed fin remote from the 
origin of the hull and is therefore not included 
in the expression for (N v)1 given in (59a). This 
term, commonly called the Munk moment,
Munk (1934), is derived in Lamb (1945) for an 
ellipsoid, deeply submerged in an ideal fluid. 
The nondimensional derivative of the Munk 
moment with respect to an


CONTROLLABILITY	237



t.".. 1.0 t,-.;=:-+--+--+--t---+--+--+--t----t----t
E
0.6 I----+ -+---"'""""-=-+
g
·	;=;;: 0.6 1----+--+- +--t----t---+---"'.,....--.=t----+---t

c"'0 4 -------



if it is directed to port at the bow and positive if it is 
directed to starboard.
  The relationship between this expression and that 
given in Equation (66) for the Munk moment 
derivative is as follows:
,)	_	(k    k   )	(Nv)i
V    i-	-	2-	1  Q       -	(p/2)L2TV
z aYB


·! 0.2 l----+--+--+--"'-=.....,......,,:-+--_+--t----t	1


2	av


;::
01.-c::s::::::::..1-_.L._,L ,l._


_j ..L._:=c::::::::=--..1


= (p/2)L2TV	(67)


u	O	0.1   0.2	0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6	0.7    0.6	09	1.0
Rotio of Minor/Mojor Axis
Fig. 48 Coefficients of accession to inertia for prolate spheroids (Davidson
and  Schiff, 1946)




angle of attack, /3, for an ellipsoid may  be expressed 
as follows:

or equivalently
  

The preceding development is based on ideal, 
poten­ tial-flow considerations. In a viscous fluid, a 
deeply submerged ellipsoid at an angle of attack 
generates vortices on the after, or downstream, side 
of the body which can be represented as reducing 
the pressures over the stern of the body as shown in 
Fig. 49 with little or no influence on the pressures 
over the bow. In spite of this representation, the 
usual simplifying assumption in hydrodynamics is 
that potential-flow ef­ fects and viscous-flow effects 
are independent of one another. Hence, it is 
assumed that the lateral force acting on the ellipsoid 
owing to vorticity is independent



where


(N'v); 
= -
(k2 - 
k1)ll.'


(66)


of and 
does 
not 
react 
with 
the 
force 
distrib
ution 
in an 
ideal 
fluid. 
The 
total 
mome
nt, N, 
acting 
on the 
sub­


the subscript i refers to the value of the  derivative  in 
an ideal fluid
k2 = coefficient of accession to inertia in lateral, y­
direction as given in Lamb (1945·)
k1 = Lamb coefficient of accession to inertia in lon­ 
gitudinal, x-direction
a' = nondimensional mass of ellipsoid
Fig. 48 shows values taken from Lamb, (1945) for k1 , 
k2 and k' (being the coefficient for accession to inertia 
in rotation). Since Fig. 48 indicates that k2 is always 
larger than k1 , (N';)t is always negative according to 
Equation (66) and hence always destabilizing.
  The Munk moment arises from the fact that in an 
ideal (nonviscous) fluid, an elongated three-dimensional 
body at an angle of attack experiences a pure couple 
tending to increase the angle  of  attack. This is shown 
in Fig. 49. This couple is composed of equal and op­ 
posite forces acting over the bow half and over  the 
stern half of the  body so that  in an  ideal  fluid,  there 
is no resultant  lateral  force  acting  on the  body,  only 
a destabilizing moment. The magnitude of this moment 
according to Fig. 49 is
(N);  = 2lYB


merged ellipsoid at  an angle of attack  in  a  real fluid 
is taken to be the sum of two independent parts, one  
the ideal Munk moment and the other the moment of 
the lateral force arising from real fluid effects. Thus, 
following Fig. 49:
                          (68)
where xP is the distance from the origin (taken at 00) 
to the point of application of the real-fluid lateral 
force, YL (negative if YL is aft of 0).
According to Fig. 49, the real-fluid lateral force YL
will always  act in  the same  direction  as  YB. Further-


so that



(N >· = 
2az YB


Vt	OV
where l is taken as always positive and YB is negative



Fig. 49 Forces acting on a submerged ellipsoid at an angle of attack in an 
ideal and a real fluid


238	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



1.0


w
h
er
e
A
' 
= 
m
as
s 
of 
sh
ip
, 
A
, 
n
o
n
di
m
e
ns
io
n
al
iz
e
d 
b
y 
(p
/ 
2)
L 
2T
A'
2 
= 
A
2 / 
(p
/ 
2)
L
2
T





S.A  o.eL ==:::t:::=:::=::r::: 	
la&:I
C


= (p/ 2)  2T


L I T(p/ 2)1r C.h2 dx


z
0
0,71---,---+-.;;::3,,"""""
l&I















4 T/b


C. = two-
dimensiona
l lateral 
added-mass 
coeffi­ cient  
(sectional-
inertia 
coefficient) 
deter­
1	mined for 
each section strip of width dx
along x-
axis. The 
C. may be 
determine
d from 
several 
sources, 
e.g., Fig. 
16 of Pro­ 
haska 
(1947) 
reproduce
d in Fig. 
50.
k1 A' = the so-called 
"added" 
mass of 
ship in the 
longitudinal 
x-direction; 
k1 A' = - (X 
),.
A'2 = the so-called 
"added" 
mass of 
ship in the 
transverse 
y-direction; 
A'2 = -
(Y'v),.
h = local draft at 
each station



Fig. SO Sectional inertia coefficients,  C, os  functions  of  local  beam/draft 
ratio and section area coefficient (Prohaska, 1947)




more, experiments with slender bodies of revolution 
reported by Johnson (1951) have shown that xP is al­ 
ways negative and lies between 0.2 and 0.3 of the 
length of the body aft of the midlength. If these•signs 
are associated with Equation (68), it will be seen that 
N, the upsetting moment in a real fluid, is smaller in 
magnitude than the upsetting moment in an ideal fluid 
which is represented by the first term of (68).
  For shiplike bodies at a free surface, the same basic 
expression shown in (68) is used but the particulars 
differ significantly. If the derivative is taken with re­ 
spect to v and the result is nondimensionalized, the 
following is obtained:
,	Nv	2l	( oY8 )
N" =	(pl 2)L 2 TV =	(pl2)L2TV
+ (p/ 2 L2TV e:vL)	(69)
Substituting from Equation (67) for the first term on 
the right of (69), we obtain for the ellipsoid:
N,v-  _-	(k2-	k >	, + xp (oY' L)	(70)
For the surface ship, Jacobs (1964) wrote an analogous 
expression:

 


k1 , k2 = as defined for  Equation  (66) and  as  given 
in Fig. 48. For surface ships, the abscissa 
of Fig. 48 is defined as 2T/L, where T 
corresponds to minor axis and L to 
major axis
xP = as defined in Equation (68)
(Y'.,h = as given in Equation (64a)
  The results for C, given by Prohaska (1947) are for 
very-high-frequency oscillations in heave. However, it 
is assumed by Martin (1961) and confirmed by Porter 
(1966) that if the scale of the abscissa of Fig. 16 of 
Prohaska (1947) is treated as a  scale of  4Tl b instead 
of b!T, the values of that figure are applicable t.o near-
zero frequency oscillations in sway. As indicated in 
Section 8.5, interest in this chapter centers on near­ 
zero frequency oscillations.
  The first term on the right of Equation (71) differs 
from that of (70) only in the expression for A'2 • The 
quantity under the integral sign in the expression  for 
A'2 represents the summation of the added masses of 
two-dimensional strips taken over the length of the 
ship. This first term can be estimated for any given  
ship form on the basis of the  data given  in Figs. 48  
and 50.
  Prediction of the second term on the right of 
Equa­ tion (71) depends on knowledge of xP for 
shiplike bod­ ies, since (Y'.,),. can be readily 
calculated from (64a). The major difference 
between ellipsoids and ships in­ sofar as xP is 
concerned is that ship bows are more slender, have 
a constant local draft forward and, for bows that are 
not bulbous in shape, have section shapes forward 
that are relatively sharp at the keel for a short 
distance aft of the bow. Therefore, these ship hulls 
at an angle of attack generate vortices on the 
downstream side of both the bow and stern, whereas 
the ellipsoid hull was assumed to generate vortices 
only downstream of the stern. This change tends to 
move forward the point of application of the













Table 5-Hull Form and Appendage Configurations Studied by Tsakonas, Martin and Jacobs
Model	Dav. Lab.
No.	description	model no.	LIB	BIT	LIT	Cp	Cs	x'a	x' m	Propeller	Rudder	Skeg(s)
1	T lor's	843	4.36	2.92	12.74	0.54	0.50	0	-0.019	None	None	None (see Fig. 81)


2	S   . Series	845	4.36	4.62	20.13
3	847	6.90	1.85	12.74


None None


4	842	6.90	2.92	20.13	+ 0.020	None and to sta 17,
18 and 20
5	846	6.90	4.62	31.9	-0.019	None and  to sta 20	(")
8.68	25.42	None and to sta 20
7	844	10.89	1.85	20.13	None
8	841	10.89	2.92	31.9	None
Series 60 Normal	3,0,0 & 3,1,1	6.0	3.12	18.75	0.614	0.60	0	+0.015	None(0) &	None(0) & A ' 8  = 0.016(1)	Normal Single Screw	,0


form	with, (1)
6,0,0 & 6,1,1	7.0	2.07	14.50	0.614	0.60
5,0   ,0 & 5,1,1	7.0	3.28	23.00	0.614	0.60


l	Stern (see Fig. 83)


0r-


2,0,0; 2,1,1;	7.0	2.68	18.75	0.614	0.60	None(0)  &  A' 8 = 0.016(1,)	r-
2,1,2 & 2,1,3	0.025(2), 0.012(3)	::::j
7,0  ,0 & 7,1,1	7.0	2.68	18.75	0.713	0.70	+0.005	None(0) & A'8 = 0.016(1)
8,0,0 & 8,1,1	7.0	2.68	18.75	0.807	0.80	-0.025
1,0,0 & 1,1,1	7.5	2.50	18.75	0.614	0.60	+0.015
4,0,0 & 4,1,1	8.0	2.34	18.75	0.614	0.60	+0.015
9	Series 60, Ext. V	9,0,0 & 9,1,1	7.5	2.50	18.75	0.614	0.60	0	+0.011
Model (Eda, 
1965)
10	Mariner	6.84	3.10	21.19	0.620	0.61	0	+0.023	None	With (see J41])	As built (see [41])
11	Destroyer DD692	9.45	2.90	27.40	0.643	0.57	0	+ 0.022	With 2 props.	With 2 ru ders	As built
12	Hopper Dredge	Heavy	6.00	2.41	14.51	0.727	0.72	0		0	None	With	Like Fig. 5l(c) 
13	Hopper Dredge		Light	5.78	3.46	20.00	0.840	0.82	0	+0.012	None	With	Like Fig. 51(c)


240	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



lateral force YL, shown in Fig. 49 for the  ellipsoid. 
That is, xP is less negative and may even be positive 
for some ship hulls, whereas it is always large and 
negative for ellipsoids.
  On the basis of experiments with a group of eight 
Taylor Standard Series models of varying BIT  ratio 
and LIB ratio (see Table 5), Martin (1961) showed that 
the distance xP lay  between  ±  0.1£ from  the  center 
of gravity of the model which  was 0.02£ forward  of 
the midlength. Jacobs (1964) suggests that xP be mea­ 
sured from G to the center of area of the hull profile. 
Thus, according to Jacobs, xP is likely to be positive 
for ships without bulbous bows. Accepting the Jacobs'


tribution of a fixed fin to the rotary-force derivative 
shown in Equation 59b. Since both k1 (see Fig. 48) 
and
x/ L are very small for  slender, shiplike bodies,  the
rotary-force derivative for the bare hull is  always 
small. This is in accord with Section 4.2. If xP is 
positive, as suggested by Jacobs (1964) (Y'r)h will 
t>e negative since (Y',,),. is always negative.
  As noted in (11), the derivative Y'r is only one of 
the terms in the coefficient of r'; the other is A'. If  
these two terms are grouped together as they  are  in  
(11), and combined with (72), the following 
expression used by Jacobs (1964) is obtained:
7


suggestion, it is apparent that whereas for ellipsoids 
the moment derivative in a real fluid is less in mag­


(A'  -   Y'r)h  = (1 + k1}A' -	(Y'v),.	(73}


nitude than the ideal moment derivative, for many 
ships the real moment derivative may be greater than 
the ideal moment derivative.
  Fundamentally, since xP is a function of external 
body geometry, it is more accurate to relate it to some 
geometric position on the body, such as its midlength 
rather than to G, which is  a  function  of  the location 
of the internal weights of the body.  This  was one of 
the reasons  why the equations of  motion  (10) were so
written that the origin could be taken at 00 rather than
at the center of gravity.
It  will  be  noted  that  the second  term  of Equation
(71) is equivalent to the expression for (Nv)f given in 
(59a) with the important distinction that xP is very 
small compared to x1 . Strictly, (59a) should include a 
term  representing  the Munk  moment of the fin.·How­
ever, because of the assumed short  chord  length  of 
the fin relative to the distance x1 , the  Munk  moment 
for the fin is negligible. For the ship's hull, on the
other hand, where xP is very small, the Munk moment 
term is of dominant importance.
  It follows from these remarks that the Munk mo­ 
ment is important for fins when moments are taken 
about an axis located in the fin. An important practical 
case is the prediction of rudder torques about the rud­ 
der stock shown partly in (124).
  The rotary-force derivative for the bare hull, (Yv)h, 
like the velocity-dependent moment derivative (Nv)h 
just discussed, also includes two terms, one arising 
from ideal fluid considerations and the other from real­ 
fluid effects. For a ship in  a  real fluid, the expression 
is as follows:
  

The first term on the right of Equation (73) is the 
actual mass plus the "added mass" in the x-direction. 
Jacobs uses the symbol A',, for the first term and 
refers to the second term as (Y' r),.. Since (Y'r),., by 
definition, should encompass all of its hydrodynamic 
parts, it should be defined as in Equation (72).
  Jacobs (1964) following Martin (1961) expresses 
the rotary-moment derivative as the sum of  a  
potential  and a viscous term although Lamb's 
potential-flow analysis indicates that Nr should be 
zero in an ideal fluid (Lamb, 1945). According to 
Jacobs:
( N ' )	(Nr),.	A'x	(Xo)2 (Y' )	(74)
r   h	v h

where A: is the so-called rotational added-mass coef­ 
ficient acting at a distance x from G;
A',= (k'/ k2 )A'2 = A, / (p/ 2)L2 T
1:m C.h 2 x dx
x	['" C.h'd:x
x = distance from O to section strip of 
width, dx, positive if forward of 0, 
negative if aft
x0/ L = taken as half the value of the prismatic 
coef­ ficient of ship and is assumed to 
be always positive
All other symbols are as defined for Equa­


(,y


)	(Yr)h	k  A'+   Xp (Y'  )	(72)
r    h	1	v h


t
i
o
n
 
(
7
1
)
Whil
e xIL 
may 
be 
either 
positi
ve or 
negat
ive, 
its 
value


with symbols as defined for Equation (71).
  The first term corresponds to an outward (centrif­ 
ugal) force exerted by the fluid on a body in rotary 
motion. This force is due to the uniform rate of change 
of direction of the longitudinal momentum of the fluid 
which has been imparted to the fluid by the body mov­ 
ing in a circular path. The second term arises from 
viscous-flow effects and is identical in form to the con-


is always small. On the other hand, x0 is much 
larger than x and since (Y',,),. is always negative, 
(N'r),. will always be large and negative. This is in 
accord with
Section 4.2.
The  two  cross-coupled  acceleration  derivatives, Y;
and N. have very small values for the bare hull 
and in practice are often assumed to be zero. The 
linear acceleration derivative Y'. is equivalent to 
the term







DESCRIPTION


(al   BARE   HULL 
(NO DEADWOOD)


C
O
N
T
R
O
L
L
A
B
I
L
I
T
Y
	241
 	     APPLICABLE
--:---   '-........-..........-.......-...._ ----
----------
J+----EQS. (64a), 
(71), (72),(74), (75)



 




DEADWOOD  AND  --..,   ----------------½-----EQS.{BO)
RUDDER	_


le)  HULL  WITH SMALL=-'-=_	------------j+----_-EQS. (83)
"""---------------
(d)  DHEUALDLWWOOITDH RLUADRDGEER  		\_ '-..		)84(.j1----
---EQS.J.- REMOVED	-

Fig. 51 Hull-deadwood configurations treated by Jacobs (1764)





- ll.'2 as defined in Equation (71). For completeness:
Y' )	_  (Y.h	_	ll.'
i,  h -	(p/2)L2T-	-	2
k	("tern


51(a), equations of the previous subsection are appli­ 
cable as shown. For the kind of deadwood configura­ 
tions shown in Figs. 51(b) and 51(c) Jacobs assumes 
that the effective span  of  the deadwood  (fin) is  
equal
to the height of the deadwood, hr, at  the trailing 
edge of  the deadwood. For the  case shown  in Fig. 
51(b), hr


=  -  (p/ 2)


T  .lw	LIT  (p/ 2) 
pC,h2 dx


(75)


is identical to the 
ship draft, T. The 
deadwood is also 
assumed to be of 
sufficiently low 
aspect ratio that 
the


with all symbols as defined for (71).
  The rotary-acceleration derivative, N', is defined in 
similar terms as follows:


Jones' formula for the lift-curve slope is applicable. If 
the fin length along the keel is taken as lr, the fin area
is then  h  lr/2; the  mean  chord, c is Ari hr = lr/2 and
the fin effective aspect ratio is 2hrl lr/2 = 4hrl 
Zrsince


N ' ) (N,h
;- h=	(p/2)L4 T
k'	,•tern


the hull provides full 
groundboard effect for the 
dead­ wood.
  If the preceding 
relationships and the 
Jones' for­ mula, Equation 
(65), are substituted in 
(58), the follow­


=  -  (p/     )  L4T .lw	LI T(pl 2)1r C.h2 x2dx	(76)


ing expression for the contribution of the fin to the 
velocity-dependent force derivative is obtained:


where k' is the Lamb coefficient for accession to inertia 
in rotation as given in Fig. 48 and  all other  symbols 
are as defined in (71).
  It is seen that both of the acceleration  derivatives,  
Y'. and N are composed only of potential-flow terms 
and they are generally calculated without resort to 
empirical experimental data.
  9.5	Prediction of the Hydrodynamic Derivatives of 
Practical Ship-Fin Configurations. Jacobs (1964) has


-(p/2)(hr)(lrf2)V (i)(4	  
(Y' v)r =	(p/2)LTV	r	=

and for hr= T
TTT
T




LT
(77a)


shown that the hydrodynamic derivatives of the bare 
hull-deadwood combinations shown in Fig. 51 can be 
computed with reasonable accuracy by simply adding 
the contributions of the appropriate fixed fin to  the 
bare hull derivatives. For the bare hull shown in Fig.


Jacobs considers the distance from the stern to the 
center of pressure of the deadwood to be a negligible 
part of the distance  to the  origin;  hence,  the 
distance x , as defined in Fig. 46 is taken  as  -  L/2. 
Inserting this value of Xr and the value of (Y' v)r from 
Equation


242	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



NOTE! htE o;)J VALUES GIVEN ON THIS AGURE ARE RELATED 
THE r; \aLUES AS FOf..LOWS: y . (Y )''•k,m'
IN ACCORDANCE WITtt [OUATIONS (72) ANO (73)
DEftlVATIVES EVALUATED WITH ORIGIN AT G, WHtCH IS 0.02 L AFT OF If


(Y',)1 =	(78)


!:---_	--



EXeERIMENTAL TSAKONAS, 1951
CALCULATED EQiiia):(fi), (75) & 1801


where A'


= A = A


/ LT


-	-•- EXPE IMENTAL AND C&LCULATtD


1	1	1



o 01----

·10



·	4


l	j
0.1



0


and h'1 
= h1 / L 
= Tl L 
for the 
deadw
ood of 
Fig. 
51(b). 
Follow
ing 
Equati
ons 
(62a-c) 
and 
noting 
that x1 
=
-L/2:

(79a)


I  I	I .--"'-··•


(79b)





::; [[


-= ·O:z•


(79c)


·O,	----.----.!L...3.
  

The total derivatives for the ship with 
the deadwood shown in Fig. 51(b) are as 
follows:
Y'v  = (Y'vh + (Y'v )1    Equation (64a) + 
(77a)
N'v  = (N'v)h + (N'v)J Equation (71) + 
(77b)
Y'r  = (Y'r)h + (Y'r)f  Equation (72) + 
(77c)


Fig. 52   Comparison of calculated and experimental stability derivatives and	N'r  = (N' r)h + (N' r)f Equation (74)+  (77d)	(80)
indexes for Taylor's Standard Series Model 8.42 ond various skeg extensions




(77) into (59a-c), and nondimensionalizing, the follow­ 
ing is obtained:
(N'v)f  = -½(Y'v)f  = +1rh/
2TL


Y';, = (Y',)h + (Y'  , )1    Equation (75) + (78)
N';. = (N';.)h + (N';.)1  Equation  (76) + (79c)
Y';, =  0 + (Y';,)1	Equation (79b)
N',  = 0  + (N ',)1	Equation (79a)


= +TTI T for h


= T	(77b)


Jacobs assumes that the derivatives (Y'.)1 , 
(N' ;.)1 ,


2	1	(Y';.)1 , (N' ,)1 , Y';., and N'. are zero.
  Because of the high aspect ratio of the small dead­ 
wood shown in Fig. 51(c), the Jones' formula which 
was used in Equations (77) is not applicable. For this 
case, Jacobs (1964) elected to use the classical lift-curve 
slope relationship


acL=	21r	d.



(81)


a/3	1+ 2a1 per ra 1an



 

TT T
=  -  4	for h1   =  T	(77d)
where the signs conform to the stern location of the 
deadwood.
The fin acceleration derivative following (61) is:
  

This equation is plotted on Fig. 137 for 
comparison with the Jones' formula and with 
Equation (122b). It is seen that while Equation (81) 
is much more accurate in the high aspect-ratio 
range than the Jones' formula, it overpredicts for 
all aspect ratios in comparison t.o Equation (122b) 
and the experimental data shown in Fig. 137. 
Nevertheless, in order to preserve the essence of the 
Jacobs' work for the remainder of this section, use 
of Equation (81) will be retained.


CONTROLLABILITY	243
  If  (81) is substituted  into (58) and the result  is non-	Y'. = (59) + (62) for deadwood - (62) for rudder 
dimensionalized on the basis of p, T, L, and V, the
following is obtained:	N', = (60) + (63c)fordeadwood-(63c)forrudder


                     (82)
  The total derivatives for the ship with the deadwood 
shown in Fig. 51(c) are then as follows:
Y'v = (Y'J + (Y'v)f
Equation (64a) + (82)


Equation (71)  -  ½(82)


Equation (72) - ½(82)


Y', = (63b)fordeadwood- (63b)forrudder
N', = (63a)fordeadwood-(63a)forrudder
  9.6	Comparison Between Results of Calculation and 
Model Experiment. Tsakonas (1959), Martin (1961), Jacobs 
(1963 and 1964), each drawing on the earlier work, have 
carried out a fairly  extensive  comparison of predicted 
hydrodynamic derivatives with experi­ mental results for a 
wide variety of ships and models. The model experimental 
results used by these authors include those of Eda and Crane 
(1965), Suarez (1963), and Paulling (1962). With the 
exception of Paulling's work, all results were measured on 
the rotating-arm facility at the Davidson Laboratory. As 
noted in Sec­ tion 8.5, the Paulling experimental data were 
based on planar motion mechanism tests at the University of 
California. A description of each of the hull form and 
appendage variations included in one or more of the






 
Equation (74) + ¼(82)


(83)






NOTE, THE (Y; JJ VALUES GIVEN ON THIS IGURE 
ARE RELATED
THE y VALUES AS FOLLOWS: v;.,v;r"-11,m'.


Y' ,i = (Y' ,)h + (Y' .),
N', = (N,)h + ¼(Y',),
Y', = 0 - ½( Y'.)1




same as Equation(80)	0


IN ACCORDANCE WITH EQUATIONS (72) ANO 
(73)
DERIVATIVES EVALUATED WITH ORIGIN 
ATG, WHICH IS 002L AFT OF I(



-
N', = 0 - ½(Y',)1
  The hull-deadwood configuration shown in Fig. 51(d) 
corresponds to that shown in Fig. 51(b) with the rudder 
removed. For this configuration, Jacobs suggests that
values  of  (Y v'   )1   for  the rudder  be computed in accor­	0


dance with (82) and inserted in the second terms  of 
(83). Obviously, A'R in this case will correspond to the 
area, A'R, of the rudder. The resulting values of the 
contribution of the rudder to the derivatives  should 
then be subtracted from the values computed  in (80) 
for the hull with the complete deadwood.
  Thus the total derivatives for the configuration 
shown in Fig. 51(d) are as follows:
Yv'  = (64a) + (77a) -   (82)




-z..


N'v = (71) + (77a) +½(82)
Y'r = (72) + (77b) + ½(82)



(84)





0.11






0.12	0.13
PROFILE AREA, SQ. m


N'r = (74) + (77c) - ¼(82)


fig. 53 Comparison of calculated 
and experimental stability 
derivatives and indexes for 
Taylor's Standard Series Model 
848 with and without skeg


244	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 6-Stability Derivatives for the Series 60 Hull
(a)	Models with Rudder and Propeller
Series	Cs Series	LIB Series
Model No.	2,1,1	7,1,1	8,1,1	3,1,1	2,1,1	1,1,1	4,1,1
Cs	0.60	0.70	0.80	LIB	6.0	7.0	7.5	8.0
BIT	2.68	2.68	2.68	BIT	3.12	2.68	2.50	2.34
A'	0.171	0.200	0.229	A'	0.200	0.171	0.160	0.150
LCG/L	0.515	0.505	0.475	LCG/L	0.515	0.515	0.515	0.515
                                  (1)	Estimated From Theory (80) 
Derivative		Eq. (80)
-Y'. = L'11	0.835	0.835	0.335	0.335	0.335	0.335	0.335





See not.es 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 on Table 66
(2)	Estimated From "Least Squares" Fit of Experimental Data

-Y'.
0.305
0.324
0.354
0.308
0.305
0.270
0.283
-N'.
0.095
0.104
0.086
0.089
0.095
0.108
0.091
Y'r
0.090
0.083
0.085
0.089
0.090
0.088
0.088
A', - Y'r
0.081
0.127
0.125
0.111
0.081
0.040
0.062
N'r
-0.070
-0.068
-0.060
-0.075
-0.070
-0.067
-0.066
C' X 102
1.37
0.94
0.89
1.32
1.37
1.03
1.25
0'1
-0.51
-0.31
-0.28
-0.42
-0.51
-0.39
-0.56
N',
-0.024
-0.025
-0.035
N.A.
-0.024
-0.022
N.A.
y•.
0.050
0.052
0.065
N.A.
0.050
0.046
N.A.
ar'laBR
-0.88
-1.44
-2.03
N.A.
-0.88
-1.06
N.A.



LIT Series	Rudder  Area Series
6,1,1	2,1,1	5,1,1	2,1,3	2,1,l	2,1,2
LIT	14.5	18.75	23.0	A'R	0	0.012	0.016	0.025
BIT	2.07	2.68	3.28	BIT	2.68	2.68	2.68	2.68
A'	0.171	0.171	0.171	A'	0.171	0.171	0.171	0.171
LCGIL	0.515	0.515	0.515	LCG/L	0.515	0.515	0.515	0.515
(1)	Estimated From Theory

 	
Eq.
(80)
 	
Eq. (84)
Eq. (82, 84)
Eq. (80)
Eq. (82, 84)

0.434
0.335
0.273
0.303
0.329
0.335
0.347

0.114
0.086
0.071
0.110
0.089
0.082
0.080

+0.094
+0.076
+0.061
+0.052
+0.073
+0.076
+0.082

-0.081
-0.066
-0.054
-0.055
-0.065
-0.066
-0.069

2.64
1.40
0.70
0.36
1.27
1.40
1.68

-0.76
-0.55
-0.33
-0.15
-0.49
-0.55
-0.64

+0.045
+0.038
+0.031

+0.034
+0.038
+0.041

-0.023
-0.019
-0.015

-0.017
-0.019
-0.021

-0.58
-0.68
-0.91

-0.68
-0.68
-0.63

(2)	Estimated From "Least Squares" Fit of Experimental Data

0.349
0.305
0.260
0.245
0.293
0.305
0.311
0.133
0.095
0.075
0.114
0.100
0.095
0.081
0.099
0.090
0.094
0.070
0.082
0.090
0.096


 






Tsakonas, Martin, and Jacobs works is given in Table
5.
  Comparisons of the velocity dependent and rotary 
derivatives taken from Jacobs (1963) are shown  for 
two Taylor Standard Series models with various skeg 
extensions in Figs. 52 and 53. The agreement between 
the prediction of these derivatives using the equations 
and experimental results is seen to be excellent, par- 
ticularly for the velocity derivatives N'v and Y'v. Val- 
ues of the stability indexes computed in accordance 
with Equation (14) are also shown in this figure.  For 
the purposes of these computations as well as those 
shown in Table 6, Jacobs assumed that the cross-cou- 
pled acceleration derivatives (Y'r) and (N'r) are zero 
along with the contributions to the acceleration deriv- 
atives of the skegs (Y' .)f and (N' ,)f'
  Table 6 tabulates data for the entire group of Series 
60 normal-form models described in Table 5. A further 
description of these models is given in Table 7, (Jacobs, 
1964). In Table 7 each model is designated by a se- 
quence of three digits. The first signifies a change in 
hull; the second signifies presence, 1, or absence, 0, of 
propeller; the third signifies  presence,  1, or  absence, 
0, of the design rudder,  A' R  =  0.016. The  digit  2 in 
the third place refers to the larger rudder, A' R = 0.025, 
while the digit 3 in the third place refers to the smaller 
rudder A' R = 0.012.
  For the models labeled (- ,1,1) with rotating pro- 
peller and design rudder, Equations (80)were used for 
predicting the derivatives with CD taken as zero since 
the propeller revolutions were adjusted to obtain zero 
drag. No correction was made to (80) for  the  effects  
of propeller rotation, although it is shown in Section
17.9 that this correction should not be negligible. For 
the models labelled (- ,0,0) (without propeller or rud- 
der) Equations (84) were used. In these cases CD is the 
experimentally measured drag coefficient at zero yaw 
angle. Models 2,1,2 and 2,1,3 with larger and smaller 
rudders respectively were  treated  by subtracting  the 
lift due to the design rudder, Equation (82)and adding 
the lift due to the replacement rudder again using (82). 
The stern configuration of all of the Series 60 models 
with the design rudder is shown in Fig. 54.
  Table 6 shows that while there are  a few instances  
of poor agreement among the individual derivatives, 
the comparison of the cumulative effect as shown by



the stability index, 0'1' shows reasonably good agree- 
ment. The latter comparisons are  shown  in Fig.  253 
for the models with rudder and propeller and  in Fig. 
176 for the models without rudder and propeller. It is 
seen that agreement in the case of  the  effect  of  the 
LIT ratio is very poor in both figures, although the 
trends are similar, and that agreement is also poor on 
Fig. 176 in the case of the effect of the LIB ratio. 
Further critical comments on the correlation  achieved 
in the case of the models with  propeller  and  rudder 
are made in Section 17.9.
  Jacobs (1964)shows similar comparisons for the re- 
mainder of the hull form and appendage 
configurations described in Table 5. The  results,  
tabulated  in Table 8, show reasonably good 
agreement for  a wide range of models. However, it is 
shown in Section 17.9 that the agreement in the case 
of some of  these  models may be fortuitous.














{b) Model Wlthovt Rudder or Propeller


Table 6	continued


Series	Cs Series		LIB Series 		LIT Series	 	


Model No.	2,0,0	7,0,0	8,0,0
Cs	0.60	0.70	0.80


LIB


3,0,0	2,0,0	1,0,0	4,0,0
	6,0,0	2,0,0	5,0,0
6.0	7.0	7.5	8.0	LIT	14.5	18.75	23.0


.,,
,a


Derivative	(1) Estimated From Theory, Equation (84)


z
.0,,










-Y'.
0.245
0.287
0.256
0.237
0.245
0.260
0.315
0.246
0.217
-N'.
0.114
0.121
0.093
0.134
0.114
0.116
0.140
0.114
0.097
Y',
0.070
0.051
0.o75
0.066
0.070
0.069
0.068
0.o70
0.071
N' r
-0.055
-0.056
-0.062
-0.054
-0.056
-0.059
-0.068
-0.065
-0.045
0'1	-0.09	+0.067	+0.033	+0.19	-0.09	-0.26	-0.22	-0.09	0
NOTES:
1 All derivatives nondimensionalized  using p, L, T and  V rather  than  p, L and  V 
2 All derivatives evaluated with origin taken at G, i.e., x'G = 0
3	All experimental data for Table 6(a) obtained with propeller o_perating at model self-propulsionpoint
4	Expenmental derivatives for Table 6(a2) taken from Eda and Crane (1965); all derivatives in Table 6(al) and 6(b) taken from Jacobs (1964) except Y'a
and Na which were computed from Equations (122a), (63a nd (63c)
5	Values of iJ'r/iJBR in Table 6(a) were computed using uation (84)


►,a
n
:I:
=mi
q
C
,a
m


CONTROLLABILITY	247


Table ?-Pertinent Characteristics of the Series 60 Hulls
Model	1,1,1	2,1,1	2,1,2	2,1,3	3,1,1	4,1,1	5,1,1	6,1,1	7,1,1	8,1,1
Length L, ft	5.0	 		 	
Beam B, ft	0.667        0.714	0.833	0.625 0.714	 	
Draft T, ft	0.267	 		0.2175	0.345	0.267
Displacement !::.., lb	33.27	35.63	41.56	31.19	29.10	46.07	41.64	47.50
LCG/L from bow	0.515 		0.505	0.475
x'x	+0.015	+0.005	-0.025
XG	0	 	
BIT	2.50	2.68		3.12	2.34	3.28	2.07	2.68	2.68




Lamb's Coefficients of Accession to Inertia for Equivalent Ellipsoids
Minor  axis/major axis, 2TIL	0.1067	0.0870	0.0690	0.1067   	
K1   (longitudinal)	0.022	0.019	0.033	0.022     	
k2 (lateral)	0.957	0.968	0.940	0.957     	
k' (rotational)	0.875	0.903	0.820	0.875
1  m  =  3.28 ft
1 kg=	2.2 lb
Other Physical Characteristics
!::..' 1 mass coefficient	0.160	0.171	0.200	0.150	0.171	0.171	0.200	0.229
k1!:t.' , longitudinal added-	 	
mass coefficient	0.003	0.004	0.004	0.003	0.004	0.006	0.004	0.005
t::..' 2 , lateral added-mass coef-	 	
ficient	0.171	0.170	0.169	0.172	0.138	0.220	0.180	0.194
!::.'., rotational added-mass	 	
coefficient	0.153	0.152	0.151	0.154	0.127	0.192	0.165	0.175
/'  z -	N'., virtual moment-	 	


of-inertia coefficient	0.0213


0:0219


0.0237	0.0206	0.0202	0.0239	0.0237	0.0271


xiL, CG of lateral added	 	
mass from LCG	0.048	0.049	0.048	0.049	0.048	0.049	0.039	0.005
xp/ L, center of area of pro-	 	


file from LCG	0.028	0.033	0.028	0.026
C'D estimated drag coeffi-	 	


-0.016


cient at  /3 = 0)	0.015	0.017	0.014	0.017	0.015	0.019	0.021
Table 8-Comparison of Theoretically Predicted Stability Indexes With Experimentally Predicted Values
cr calc.	crtrcalc.
Model Description	Equations used	1rom	om
No. from	for theor.	theor.	Ref. for experimental	exper.
Table 5	Classification	Appendage description	derivatives	derivatives	derivatives	derivatives
9	Series 60 Ext V	with  prop & rudder	(80)	-0.62	(Eda and Crane, 1965)	-0.39
9	Series 60 Ext V	w/o pr°ic & rudder	(84)	-0.17	(Eda and Crane, 1965)	-0.17
10	Mariner	with ru der only	(80)	-0.49	(Jacobs, 1964)	-0.49
10	Mariner	with rudder only	(80)	-0.49	(Pauling and Wood, 1962)	-0.16 to
-0.42
11	Destroyer DD692	with 2 prop & 2 rudders	(80)	-0.76	(Jacobs, 1964)	-0.76
12	Hopper dredge, heavy	with skeg & rudder	(83)	+0.84	(Jacobs, 1964)	+0.89
13	Hopper dredge, light	with skeg & rudder	(83)	+0.60	(Jacobs, 1964)	+0.82




  9.7	Summary and Update of Slender Body Strip The­ 
oretical Approaches. While the slender body and strip 
methods described in preceding sections have had some 
success in the case of  aircraft  where  body  geometry 
is dominated by wings and fins, results for ships have 
not been very accurate since there are no flat stabiliz-


ing surf aces and the flow around the hull is greatly 
altered by the fluid viscosity. Clarke's (1982) review 
of attempts assuming the hull is a low aspect ratio 
wing turned on its side and the Jones theory 
concludes the following derivatives as a function of 
the length to draft ratio of the ship, multiplied by 
certain constant


248	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



factors:


Y' • = -
1r(fr
(1)




2
N', = -'IT 
(I, 
[[Cnx'2:ls
tern +	w	Cnx'dx']
where C8 
is the 
zero 
frequenc
y added 
mass 
coefficie
nt


Y';  = -1r(f)2(0)
N',  = -1r(f)2(0)
r 	


at station x', which is 
the non-dimensional 
(xlL) from midships 
(these equations  
reduce to (85) if C8     = 
1.0 for all hull 
sections).
  Not-well-understood 
viscosity effects near 
the stern are dominant 
and have made it 
difficult to successfully
evaluate these 
expressions. Direct 
evaluation of the 
acceleration  and  
velocity derivatives  
is thus not yet


N'; = -1r(f (f2)



(85)


thought to be practical. The semi-
empirical and theo­
retical approaches described in the 
next section are more promising  
practical  techniques for design 
pur­


Y'v = -1r(fY (1)
Y'r = -1r(fY (- )
N'v = -1r(fY G)
N' r = -1r(fr( )
By using the horizontal added mass coefficients C8 for 
sections along the hull, Clarke (1972) extended the 
slender body strip method to yield expressions for the 
derivatives dependent on hull shape through the lon­ 
gitudinal added mass distribution. These Equations
(86) result when the constant factors in (85) are re­ 
placed by integral functions of the added mass distri­ 
bution:
T) 2 r8tern
Y',  = -7T  £	CHdx'

N',  = -1r(fY1:rn CHX'dx'


poses.
  9.8	Semi-Empirical Methods, Regression Analysis, 
and    Three-Dimensional     Potential     Flow     Analy­ 
sis. Several attempts have been made to derive em­ 
pirical expressions for the derivatives based on 
measured values from planar motion and rotating 
arm experiments, but primarily for the velocity 
derivatives. Smitt (1970), Norrbin (1971), and Inoue 
(1981) devel­
oped empirical formulas that were compared by 
Clarke (1982) against scatter plots of velocity 
derivatives available in the literature. Clarke then 
used multiple linear regression analysis to develop 
empirical for­ mulas to explain the variation in the 
available data for the velocity derivatives and also 
the acceleration de­ rivatives. His resulting four 
equations for velocity de­ rivatives were obtained 
from the pooled data, and the remaining equations 
for acceleration derivatives from available planar 
motion data:
- Y' 1,/ 1r(TI L )2 = 1 + 0-16 CiJ]IT- 5-1(BI L )2
(5-0)	(2-0)
- Y'; / 1r(TI L)2 = 0-67 BIL - 0-0033 (BI T )2
(7-2)	(3-2)
- N' , / 1r(TI L)2 = 1-1 BIL - 0,041 BIT
(2-9)	(2-1)
- N' ;l 1r(TIL )2 = 1/12 + 0-017 CiJ]IT - 0.33 BIL
(4-3)	(5-6) (87)


N'; = -1r(fY{	C8 X' 2dx'
Y'v = -1r(fY [CH]Stern
Y'r = -1r(fY [CHx']stern




(86)


- Y ' vl 1r(TI L )2 = 1 + 0-40 CiJ]IT
(
9
-
6
)
- Y ' rl 1r(TI  L )2  = -1/2 + 2-2 BIL 
-	0-080 BIT
(5-2)	(4-1)
- N' vl 1r(TI L )2 = 1/2 + 2-4 TIL
(
0
-
6
)
-  N' ,/ 1T( TIL )2  = 1/4   + 0-039 BIT  -    
0-56 BIL
(3-4)	(2-2)


CONTROLLABILITY	249



Results of the regression analysis are statistically sig­ 
nificant but have not accounted for all the variations 
in the available derivative data and are far from sat­ 
isfactory.
Mikelis and Price (1980) have found good agreement
with measurements in both deep and shallow water 
through use of a three-dimensional potential flow anal­ 
ysis of the fluid using a finite element method. Accu­ 
rate acceleration coefficients can thus be developed 
taking into account the ship's individual form.
  9.9 Systems Identification Methods. The formal 
scientific approach of systems identification has also 
been utilized to develop hydrodynamic coefficients for 
mathematical modeling of ship trajectories. Primary 
application has been in the development of math model 
coefficients from full scale ship operations for use in 
ship handling computer simulations (see description of 
Ship Handling Simulators in Section 16.9).
  Systems identification is the technology of devel­ 
oping mathematical models of vehicles from their dy­ 
namic responses to rudder movements. It is a highly 
mathematical technology that can be rigorously de­ 
fined only in statistical terminology. The following en­ 
gineering application definition is instructive (Hall, 
1977): "System identification determines, from a given 
input/ output data record of vehicle test response, an 
estimate of the physical model which relates to the 
observed data."
  The actual processing of the data requires three 
major steps (Trankle, 1979): (a) model structure de­ 
termination, (b) parameter estimation; and (c) model 
validation. Model structure determination is the proc­ 
ess of selecting a mathematical form for the equations 
of motion. Questions addressed here include the de­ 
termination of the order of the model (e.g., number of 
degrees of freedom) and a mathematical form (e.g., 
polynomial) to represent any nonlinear character in the 
dynamic equations. For linear dynamic systems, the 
determination of order is of primary importance. For 
nonlinear systems the determination of forms to rep­ 
resent nonlinearities has equal importance. For the 
case of ship hydrodynamics, model structure deter­ 
mination reduces to finding equations to represent the 
three terms N', Y', and X' of Equation 22. For ex­ 
ample, the curvature in the function representing yaw 
moment N' as a function of v' might use a cubic poly­ 
nomial
N' = a0 + ai(v') + ... + a.r(v ') 3 + ...
or might use a square-absolute form
N' = ao + a1(v') + ... + a.rv'lv'I + ...
  (a)	Model structure determination methods such 
as subset regression can assess the relative utility of 
these two models (Draper and Smith, 1966).
  (b)	The estimation of unknown parameter values 
follows the determination of a suitable model struc­ 
ture. Numerical values of unknown parameters are 
determined by choosing them to optimize some per-



formance index that measures how well the mathe­ 
matical model represents the observed data. Two 
methods that have been applied to the ship hydrody­ 
namics case are output error (Trankle, 1985) and ex­ 
tended Kalman filter (Abkowitz, 1980).
  The output error method requires the 
minimization of the fit error between the measured 
ship trajectory and the trajectory as estimated by a 
simulation. Let '11._(t;) be a vector of measurements 
taken aboard the ship during a set of maneuvers. 
This vector might include
u (longitudinal velocity)
v (lateral velocity)
r  (yaw rate)
iJ, (yaw angle)
x  (position 
north)
y  (position east)
  Let fr.(O,t;) be the corresponding measurements as 
estimatea by a simulation of the same maneuver. The 
simulated measurements are functions of a vector of 
unknown parameters 8 (hydrodynamic  coefficients 
such as Yv, Nr) as well as of time. The fit error E(O,t;) 
and performance  measure  L0  are	- -
n
         L0   = L!@.t;) • W!@.t;)
i=l

where W is a diagonal weighting matrix.
  The extended Kalman filter method is similar to 
the output error method except that the parameters 
are treated as additional differential equations to be 
inte­ grated along with the six first order differential 
equa­ tions of the ship motion. The extended 
Kalman filter method has the advantage of being 
able to provide parameter estimates in real time, i.e., 
as the data are collected. Its disadvantage is that 
convergence to the best parameter values may be 
more difficult to control.
(c)	Model validation follows the determination of
model structure and  estimation  of  parameter  values. 
A good criterion for the validation of a  model is  the 
use of the model to predict new data. A typical pro­ 
cedure might be to use, say, 80 percent of the available 
data to determine the model structure and parameter 
values. Then the resulting model would be used to 
predict ship motion for the  remaining  20 percent  of 
the data. The degree of validation achieved  can  then 
be interpreted from the accuracy of the prediction.
  Statistical performance criteria for "the accuracy of 
the prediction" include the magnitude of the mean 
square fit error E(O,t;) in predicting the additional data 
and the whiteness or statistical  independence of  the 
fit errors. Whiteness can often be evaluated effectively 
by visual inspection of plots of the observed data 
'/1._(t;) superimposed on plots of the predicted data 
'frj,6,t;). Plots of the fit error history itself may also be 
used. Finally, validation should include comparison of 
the model determined from system identification with


250	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

- "Measurement" or Identification of the Magnitude 
of the Hydrodynamic Coefficients from the 
Measurement of the Ship Response to Given Rudder 
Action.




UNPUT I
Rudder	t) ---t.-.
Heading •<tl- 
Yaw rate r(t) 
Surge vel. u{t) 
Sway vel. v (t)



SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM USING 
THE EXTENDED KALMAN FILTER
TECHNIQUE


Fig. 55 System identification


!OUTPUT I
Hydrodynamic 
Coefficients 
and Current
Yv, Yr, NV, Nr,
you' Nvvv' Xu' Xuu' 
Yvvv' Nrrv' etc.
u current





models available a priori. Hydrodynamic coefficients 
of a ship as determined by identification should be 
compared to those for similar hull forms determined 
from captive model tests.
  Whereas known simulation models are used to pre­ 
dict the output of the system to any given input to the 
system (ship motion response to rudder  deflection  or 
to propeller revolutions), the system identification 
process "identifies" the proper simulation  model  and 
its coefficients by analyzing various measured outputs 
in relation to the particular inputs that caused them. 
Abkowitz (1980) successfully applied systems identi­ 
fication techniques to the analysis of  data  from  the 
full scale trials for the VLCC Esso Osaka (Crane, 
1979). Fig. 55 from Abkowitz shows a schematic of the 
system identification procedure. Here the input to the 
system identification process is both the rudder de­ 
flection and the resulting motion responses, while the 
output is the identified parameters of the simulation 
model. System simulation is essentially an integration 
of a known differential equation; a process which is














.N.,+----,--.---,----r--..-----.---.----,--  -.....---.


rather exact. System identification, on the other  hand, 
is concerned with comparing the integral (a numerical 
value) and the parameter (also a numerical value) and 
determining the differential equation involved (the in­ 
tegrand). The latter process is far from being exact, 
since several differential equations could give the 
same integral.
  Most system identification techniques essentially go 
through a process whereby the predicted  values  of 
state variables (the motion variables  in our case of  u, 
v, r, and i./J as functions of time) are compared  with 
the measured variables, and the differences are con­ 
sidered the error in the estimation. The values of the 
coefficients are then continuously updated, as the data 
are passed through, by an algorithm that tends  to 
reduce the error, eventually seeking a set of coeffi­ 
cients which minimizes the error function.
  Abkowitz (1980) used the Extended Kalman filter 
(EKF) technique with computer programs as devel­ 
oped and refined at MIT for the ship maneuvering 
problem. In this approach, the hydrodynamic coeffi­ 
cients are treated as additional variables but must be 
constant in time. Details of the MIT system are  given 
in Szeto (1977) and Hwang (1980).
  Experience with system identification processes 
shows that identifiability is enhanced by careful 
atten­ tion to the particular choice of trials and to 
achieving quality of measured data. The solution of 
coefficient drift and error cancellation is also a key 
to successful identification. The techniques of 
parallel processing and over and under initial 
estimates were developed to solve the coefficient 
drift problem. Parallel process­ ing involves passing 
the data of two different maneu­ vers (a Z-maneuver 
with a turning circle maneuver, for instance) 
simultaneously through the identification process. 
The over and under initial estimates technique 
involves the automatic analysis of ratios of 
coefficients through the deliberate  overestimation 
of  the numer­
ator and underestimation of the denominator. As the 
updating process proceeds, the minimizing of the 
error


300	600	900
TIME (SEC.)


1200	1500


between estimated and 
measured motion 
parameters


Fig. 56 Heading simulation of 20-deg-20-deg zigzag maneuver for Esso 
Osaka after the identification, deep waler


.vill result in approaching the correct ratio.
The   resultant	simulation	equations	developed


CONTROLLABILITY	251


through Abkowitz's system  identification study  show  Osaka data,  the  method holds great  potential  for easy 
very good agreement with trial data. An example cor- application by using a portable instrumentation pack-  
relation is shown in Fig. 56. Now that the process has  age on future  ship trials to identify appropriate  models  
been refined and carefully validated with the Esso and coefficients for other vessels (Trankle, 1986).


Section  10
Accelerating,	Stopping, and Backing
   10.1  Introduction.  Accelerating,   stopping,   and   rest  to  a given  astern  speed,  or  distance.  A  backing 
backing are important ship maneuvers; the latter two propeller, on the other hand is one in which the blades 
particularly when near land, other vessels, and fixed are turning with negative angle of attack,  producing 
structures. However, the interactions between hull and astern thrust.
propeller(s) during these  maneuvers  are quite complex.			The principal performance indexes of these maneu- 
Because  of this  and the  transient  character of maneu-		vers reflect the time and distance from initiation to 
vering,  empirical calculations  of the characteristics  of		completion. To simplify analyses, we often assume that 
these  maneuvers  are  sometimes  used when adequate		the ship travels on a straight line during stopping. 
motion equation  coefficients are  not  available for sim-		This is generally not true except in the case of some 
ulation.		multiscrew ships with opposite rotating propellers, in 
Accelerating   means increasing ship speed from rest,	the absence of appreciable wind, current, and rudder
or  from  a  particular   ahead  speed  to  a higher  ahead	angle  (and  with  controls-fixed straight-line  stability) .
.speed.			For the backing or stopping of ships with single-screws 
Stopping	is  decelerating   the  ship  from any given	or unirotating multiscrews, the rotation of the pro- ahead  
speed  until  the  ship  comes  to  rest. When dis-		peller tends to swing the stern to port if the propellers 
cussing  stopping capabilities, at least two ahead speeds		are right-handed (positive rotation according to sign 
should  be  considered:  a  crash  stop  from full-ahead-		convention), and to starboard if they are left-handed 
sea-speed,  and  a  "stop   from  harbor speed."  Harbor		(negative  rotation).  Other  factors  may cause  the ship
speed  may be about  12 knots  for  a slow ship, such as	to veer in the opposite direction.
a tanker, or about 15 knots for a fast ship, such as a When a ship deviates from its straight path during 
containership. Although in practice "emergency full  a stopping or backing maneuver,  the  distance traveled 
astern" is almost never ordered from  full-ahead-sea-  is measured  along its curved track.  But the projections 
speed,  it  is  a  customary  machinery  acceptance  trial,  of this distance, termed  head reach  and side reach  are 
and the results are useful as a relative  measure  of  generally  of  greater  importance  as  performance  in-  
stopping ability.	dexes.
  Coasting  refers  to decelerating  without using back-		10.2		Acceleration	Times,	Distances,	and	Veloel- 
ing  power.  Time  and  distance  required  for  a ship to	ties.	Acceleration ahead is important for naval ships 
decelerate  to a slower speed is often  of interest in ship	that may have a change position rapidly in a task force, 
handling.  Decelerating  more generally  means that en-	or accelerate  suddenly  for  other  tactical  reasons. 
gine  power   ahead  is  insufficient  to maintain  steady		A method for determining the acceleration of a ship 
forward   speed.  In  that  case,  the unbalanced longitu-	is given by Peach (1963).The value of the accelerating 
dinal  force  (i.e.,  thrust   is  less  than resistance)  then	force, at any given speed, is the difference between 
causes   the  ship  to  decelerate   until resistance  again	the value of the ship's net thrust, T.j> available at that 
equals   thrust,   at   some  slower  speed.  Rarely will a	speed, and the ship's resistance, Ro at the same speed, 
shiphandler  coast  a ship to  near dead-in-the-water, be-	Fig. 57. The acceleration may then be found from
cause of the very long time it takes. However, dece- 
lerating at the least sustainable ahead power at which 
the ship will steer is very important to the ship handler. 
The distance required to thus decelerate is critical to 
getting a ship's speed down from the harbor approach 
velocity to a speed regime at which tugs can be effec- 
tive in controlling the ship. In harbors where berthing 
may be located near the harbor  entrance,  this  figures 
in harbor design, siting of terminals, and in the selec- 
tion and use of tugs. In  some places it has  led to the 
use of braking tugs.
Backing a ship is a maneuver of accelerating from








































  Typical relationships amongst HI> T.p, X, and speed 
for a steam turbine ship are shown in  the  Figure. 
Thrust curves 1 and 2 in Fig. 57 apply to the  case 
where the initial speed is greater than zero. In the case 
shown, because thrust  is  greater  than  resistance  at 
the initial speed, there is no equilibrium and the ship 
accelerates. At "execute," the thrust is increased rap- 
idly to the amount desired. Then thrust curve 1 applies. 
Of course, the time to reach total equilibrium at max- 
imum speed will be quite long. This is because resist- 
ance will very gradually approach the thrust curve as 
speed approaches maximum, and there is gradually 
diminishing unbalanced thrust remaining to cause ac- 
celeration.
  If the final desired speed after acceleration is less 
than the maximum speed, then much less time and 
distance are needed. Then the maximum available 
thrust of curve 1 is utilized until the desired speed is 
reached and the thrust is appropriately  reduced  to 
equal the resistance at the desired speed, curve 2. This 
technique is useful in conducting maneuvering trials


CONTROLLABILITY	253
-	ASTERN RPM IN % RATED AHEAD RPM


20	20
16	16 t


12-0
6       r
ig


;_,o.:;.o:..


-..;;,ao:..__


:6:,;:o-----4.;.;.0::...


--=;2 0.....,,,_..,.o 0


t	4     1w5


(I)	12


12 :,	z


!;.:
>
8


:c
I  u.


::,c
::i;


(/)	2   (/)

4	4




20	40	60	10
1.sEc-


0	0
100


fig. 58 Speed and distance versus time for a starting submarine





to Fig. 60. While this figure is applicable in particular 
only to the engine astern  condition,  it  is also  typical 
of ahead conditions. Since the prime-mover character­ 
istic curves shown dashed in Fig. 60 are for a constant 
power steam turbine, they show increasing values of 
torque as the RPM is reduced. If a diesel-engine prime 
mover were portrayed, the dashed lines would be ap­ 
proximately horizontal.
  Simplifying assumptions usually made in calculating 
the accelerating characteristics of ships are:
  (a)	Instantaneous propeller acceleration: Al­ 
though in reality  it  takes  finite time for the propeller 
to accelerate to a higher rotational speed, this as­ 
sumption is sometimes made as in the submarine ex­ 
ample of Peach (1963). The propeller and the value of 
the thrust are thus assumed to change instanta-












Fig. 60  Propeller-turbine characteristics


neously. Since for most ships the time to accelerate 
is large compared to the time to build up thrust, this 
assumption introduces only a small error.
(b)	Constant thrust deduction: Thrust deduction




20



16



t 12


--
-
-
-


v
a
r
i
e
s 
w
i
t
h 
b
o
t
h 
p
r
o
p
e
l
l
e
r 
s
p
e
e
d 
a
n
d 
s
h
i
p
s 
s
p
e
e
d
. 
H
o
w
­ 
e
v
e
r
, 
f
o
r 
m
o
s
t 
c
a
s
e
s
, 
t
h
e
s
e 
v
a
r
i
a
t
i
o
n
s 
w
i
l
l 
n
o
t 
a
p
p
r
e
­ 
c
i
a
b
l
y 
c
h
a
n
g
e 
t
h
e 
t
i
m
e 
t
o 
r
e
a
c
h 
a 
g
i
v
e
n 
a
h
e
a
d 
s
p
e
e
d
. 
F
o
r 
t
h
e 
s
u
b
m
a
r
i
n
e 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
, 
t
h
r
u
s
t 
d
e
d
u
c
t
i
o
n 
w
a
s 
a
s
­ 
s
u
m
e
d 
t
o 
b
e 
c
o
n
s
t
a
n
t 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
o
u
t 
t
h
e 
s
t
a
r
t
i
n
g 
m
a
n
e
u
­ 
v
e
r
. 
I
t 
i
s 
a
l
s
o 
a
s
s
u
m
e
d 
t
o 
b
e 
c
o
n
s
t
a
n
t 
f
o
r 
t
h
e 
s
t
o
p
p
i
n
g 
m
a
n
e
u
v
e
r 
d
i
s
c
u
s
s
e
d 
i
n 
t
h
e 
n
e
x
t 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
.

T
a
b
l
e 
1
0
-
A
p
p
r
o
x
i
m
a
t
e 
V
a
l
u
e
s 
o
f 
n 
i
n 
E
x
p
r
e
s
s
i
o
n 
R
 
=


>  8	kV2 as a Function of VI.Ji for Destroyer-Type Hulls
Approximate value of n for BIT= 3.0 
and C. = 2 X 10- 3


4




0
0	4	8	12	16	20
S FT· HUNDREDS -



V/.,/L
<0.7
0.7-1.2
1.2-1.3
1.3-1.5
 

C L7B


0.60
9.6
2.0
2.3
3.9
3.9


0.65
10.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
3.9



 
0	2	4	6
S    M • HUNDREDS -
fig. 59 Speed versus distance for a starting submarine


1.5-1.8
>1.8
C. = Volumetric coefficient 7 / L3


2.1
1.5


2.1
1.5


254	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 
Fig. 61 Resistance, thrust and decelerating force versus speed in a stopping 
maneuver



  10.3	Stopping Distances. Stopping is a maneuver 
of interest primarily from the point of view of avoiding 
collisions, rammings, and groundings. The distance in 
the original direction traveled by a ship in coming to 
a stop is called the head reach.Stopping tests of single­ 
screw ships indicate that from modest maneuvering 
speeds, head reach is approximately the same whether 
the stopping path is along a straight or curved trajec­ 
tory (Chase, et al 1957).
  Ship operators generally consider the head reach 
from harbor speeds, established at 12 knots by Chase 
et al (1957), to be the important criterion for deter­ 
mining the backing power of ships. The head reach 
from full speed has little bearing because collision 
usually may be avoided more readily by turning than 
by stopping. As initial ship speed is reduced, the stop­ 
ping maneuver does assume greater importance and 
the turning maneuver becomes less significant.
  The two factors that are important in determining 
the accelerating characteristics of ships are also im­ 
portant for stopping. The ship's own resistance at 
higher initial speed will dissipate a substantial amount 
of the kinetic energy in the ship at the beginning of 
the maneuver. The resistance falls off rapidly, how­


stop was developed in Chase, et al (1957), based on 
both theoretical and empirical considerations. This 
method considers the finite time for the thrust to 
change from steady ahead to steady astern, Fig. 62, 
and is applicable to any ship at any speed through 
use of an expression for ship's resistance
R = kV"
	(91
)
where n may be any number, zero or greater. The 
method assumes that if the  resistance  varies  as  the 
nth power of the velocity at maximum ship speed, it 
will vary as the same power of the velocity at all 
speeds down to zero. This is approximately true only 
for the
case of  n  = 2; hence the method is strictly valid  only
for n = 2. Full-scale trial data have shown that it 
can be accurate to within a few percent for straight 
path stopping. The following paragraphs trace the 
manual calculation procedure.
  Propeller thrust is shown in Fig. 62 as a linear 
func­ tion of the distance the ship travels until a 
constant astern value of T1 is reached. The thrust is 
then as­ sumed to remain constant. Ship trial 
measurements of Hewins, Chase and Ruiz (1950) 
justify this approxi­ mation. The constant astern 
thrust, Ti, corresponds to astern thrust at dead in the 
water, while T0 is the initial free-running ahead thrust 
at the start of the maneuver. Both T0 and T1 are net 
thrusts; i.e., they include thrust­ deduction 
corrections.
  Chase, et al (1957) showed that good correlation be­ 
tween calculated and measured values of head reach 
and time to stop is obtained by assuming that the time











 	s	s


ever, with speed decrease, Fig. 61. The other factor is	 	


the backing thrust developed by the ship's propeller. 
Opposing the deceleration caused  by these two forces 
is the inertial effect of the ship's mass plus its longi­ 
tudinal added mass.
A method for calculating head reach and time to


DEAD-IN
THE WATER


Fig. 62  Assumed thrust during croshbock


CONTROLLABILITY	255
5.-----r---.-----,----..-----.------.---,;----'l,II"'---,



z	 
-l.5t---	t










5
R0 / T1



6	7	8	9


Fig. 63 Dynamic potential and dynamic impulse; astern thrust instantaneously applied




required to achieve constant astern thrust is the same 
as that required to close the ahead and open the astern 
throttle. This time, t, may be estimated from experi­ 
ence, or 20 seconds used for a modern vessel with 
automated controls.
  The basic operations used in Chase, et al (1957) to 
compute head reach and time to stop are identical to 
Equations (88), (89), and (90). It was found that the 
variables naturally grouped themselves in three di­ 
mensionless ratios: dynamic potential, dynamic im­ 
pulse, and ahead resistance to astern thrust. They were 
formalized with symbols as follows:


1.0


0.9


0.8


0.7


0.6
I-
"o


ynam1c potentia ,	= (	_ XjV

where

Dynam.  1.c 1mpu1 se  =  T   = (	_RoXt j  Vo
Ahead resistance to astern thrust ratio = R0
where








/ T1


(92)



(93)


io.s
C
Q
to
0.4


0.3


0.2













LEGEND
R0 t,
Tr ■-  lm-- Xul- V0
R0•  RESISTANCE  AT	LB
tr • SECONDS TO OPEN ASTERN
THROTTLE


V0 = initial steady ahead ship's speed at  the start  
of the stopping maneuver.


0.1


m-Xu• 754
V0 • SPEED OF APPROACH, fps
4 • DISPLACEMENT, TONS


R0 = total resistance at V0•
  T1   = constant astern thrust (dead in water) 
Other symbols were defined previously.
  Dynamic potential relates effective energy expended 
(as if the initial resistance stayed constant throughout


T, • ASTERN THRUST AT V•O
I
Q2	Q4	0.6	0.8	1.0	1.2	1.4
Fig. 64 Dynamic potential and dynamic impulse;  astern  thrust  graduaHy 
applied


256	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

METERS,----------------------



















LOADED RUNS
BALLAST
FULL SPEED
HALF SPEED
SLOW SPEED
FULL SPEED
96
65
42
100
32 SEC.
25 SEC.
15 SEC.
26 SEC.
60 IN I MIN. 37 SEC.
1.463M
snM
65 INIMIN. 39 SEC.
841 M
114M
60 IN O MIN. 51SEC.
311 M
NIL
62 IN 2 MIN. II SEC.
1097 M
293 M
8 MIN.
5MIN. 18 SEC.
2 MIN. 49 SEC.
5 MIN. 15 SEC.
110°
90°
2•
35°
Fig. 65 Emergency stopping trials Essa Lima (26,700 dwt) (Crane, 1973)



the stopping distance) to the loss of kinetic energy of 
the ship. Dynamic impulse relates the impulse supplied 
by the ship's resistance (as if it had remained constant 
throughout the stopping time) until the loss of mo­ 
mentum of the ship. Equations (92) and (93), based on 
average impulse and momentum, when solved for stop­ 
ping time and head reach show that time and reach 
vary inversely with retarding force. At slow ship 
speeds, propulsion is the predominant stopping force 
because resistance is small. Also, because at slow 
speed thrust varies approximately as RPM squared, 
head reach and stopping time show inverse square law 
characteristic versus RPM. From higher approach 
speeds the RPM squared characteristics is diluted by 
the initially large hull resistance.	·
  The dynamic potential D of Equation (92), from 
which the head reach Smay be computed, is expressed 
by D  =  D; + 6D, while the  dynamic impulse -r, from
which the time to stop can be computed, is expressed 
by T = T; + 8-r. Terms D; and T; are the values of the 
dynamic potential and the dynamic impulse for a con­
stant astern thrust instantaneously applied, and are 
given in Chase, et al (1957) as functions of R0 / T1   and
n.	Terms 8D and 8-r are corrections to D and T that
take account of the fact that it takes finite time for 
the astern thrust, T1, to develop. Values of 8D and 8-r 
are given as functions of n, R0 IT1 and T,, where T, is


the value of T when t = t,. As indicated earlier, t, is 
the time taken to open the astern throttle. Figs. 63 
and 64 taken from Chase, et al (1957) show values 
of D;, T;, 6D, and 6T for n = 2 (m = ship mass in 
days). In addition to the assumption of n = 2, the 
following assumptions may be used in association 
with Figs. 63
and 64 for estimates of head reach early in the design 
stage:
  (a)	Astern thrust at dead in the water, T1  ,  is given 
by T1 = 5.5 Q/P, where  Q1  is the numerical  value of 
the astern torque at dead  in the  water  in ft-lb  and  P 
is the propeller pitch in ft.
(b)   X,; :::: -0.08 m.
  (c) The time to close the ahead and open the 
astern throttle, t,, is 20 sec.
  Values of Q1 needed in the first of these 
assumptions may be obtained from Fig. 60. 
Turbines of most mer­ chant ships, were designed to 
provide an astern torque equal to 80 percent of the 
rated ahead torque at an astern propeller rpm of 50 
percent of the rated ahead rpm. This is commonly 
referred to as "80-50" backing power, and many 
merchant-ship, steam turbines have been designed 
to these values. In Fig. 60, the (dashed) turbine 
characteristic curve passing through the "80- 50" 
point intersects the propeller characteristic curve
(PID = 1.04) at a torque ratio Q1/ Q of 0.755.














1,000





500





0






500





1,000


-
-
-
	
-
-
-
-
	
-
---
---
---
---
---
---
--




 
0	500	1,000	1,500	2,000	2,500	3,000	3,500	4,000

HEAD REACH, METERS ----
Fig. 66 Comparision of calculoted "crash astem" maneuvers with full-scale trial results (Exxon 191,000-dwt tankers, load condition) (Crane, 1973)


 




  Chase, et al (1957) gives a detailed explanation of 
the construction of Fig. 60, as well as information for 
estimating the astern torques for  types  of  power 
plants other than steam turbines.
  10.4	Stopping with Freedom to Turn. In the "crash 
astern" maneuver of a single-screw ship, the trajectory 
is usually unpredictable due to loss of directional con- 
trol. This was illustrated by the 1955trials of the Esso 
Lima and Esso Paterson (Hewins, Chase, and Ruiz, 
1950). See Fig. 65 for examples of Esso Lima results.
  At high speeds and with sufficient sea room, turning 
of a large ship is much superior to stopping for avoid- 
ing a hazard. Advance in a turn is much less than head 
reach in stopping, and directional control is maintained. 
This is illustrated by full-scale trials and simulated 
stopping	and   turning	maneuvers	of the former 
190,000-dwtExxon design tanker shown in Fig. 66 for 
the trial full-load case.
  From a slower approach speed, such as 6 knots, head 
reach and heading and path deflections during stopping 
are much less, and no general superiority for turning 
exists.
  Full-scale trials indicate that if an auxiliary steering 
control force, such as a stern thruster, acts  at  the  
stern, it may be capable of controlling a ship's heading 
during a stopping maneuver under conditions  when  
the ship's rudder or bow thruster  cannot.  However, 
this is not a general conclusion that a  stern  thruster 
will materially affect directional control when stopping 
from speeds above 6 knots.
  10.S	Rudder Cycling Maneuver.	In June 1969, ma- 
neuvering trials of the Esso Bernicia, a 190,000-dwt


tanker, were conducted and reported  (Clarke,  1970). 
As part of the trials the  "rudder  cycling"  maneuver 
was evaluated as a means of stopping without loss of 
steering control. The rudder cycling maneuver,  which 
is illustrated in Clark (1970)is also depicted in Fig. 67. 
The maneuver comprises four partial turns to alter- 
nating sides about the base heading. Large speed re- 
duction results from the hull's inertial reactions in the 
turns. Engine speed is reduced in steps during the 
maneuver until finally reversed, and engine orders are 
keyed to heading changes. Effectiveness of the ma- 
neuver and required lateral sea room are shown clearly 
in Fig. 67 (although exact comparison betwen rudder 
cycling and crash astern is not possible due to differ- 
ences in wind velocity and water depth).
  The general advantages of the rudder cycling stop- 
ping maneuver over the conventional crash  astern  are 
a more predictable trajectory and a  reduced  head 
reach. However, if lateral sea room permits, a simple 
hard-over turn is better than either and from approach 
speeds below about 8 knots the direct crash astern 
maneuver is generally best. Of course, if impact 
cannot be avoided, crash astern will reduce the 
striking ves- sel's speed and energy of impact.
  10.6	EHects of Machinery Charaderlstlc. and Dy- 
namics. The characteristics and dynamics of the pro- 
pulsion machinery (engine, gears, shafting, and 
propellers) can have a significant effect on controlla- 
bility.
  Stopping ability of lighter, relatively high powered 
vessels is significantly dependent on maximum attain- 
able time rates of change of propeller RPM, which


CONTROLLABILITY	259


determine the time required to stop the propellers and 
to approach maximum astern RPM. Head reach in a 
crash stop will, for these ships, decrease significantly


Table  ll-Main		particulars of tankers studied (Crane, 
1973)
Esso


with a significant increase in time rate of change of 
propeller RPM. The effect will be less for very large 
relatively low powered vessels such as large tankers. 
Controllability, and particularly stopping ability, can be 
seriously degraded in restricted waters for direct drive 
diesel-powered ships that have  a limited ability to 
reverse engines frequently. Limited compressed air 
supply can severely limit the number of times the en- 
gines can be reversed in a relatively short period, and 
that can result in temporary loss  of ability to reverse 
the propellers under the demands imposed by severely 
restricted water conditions. Such limitations should be
avoided in any ship design.
  10.7	Simulation of Stopping. The complexity of ac- 
celerating, stopping, and backing maneuvers  in  real 
life makes computer simulation useful for their study. 
Simulation equations contain terms selected depending 
on their use for design or operating studies or for 
training. For each of these uses, simulations must al- 
low for the effect of transient RPM on rudder forces, 
and for the inclusion of other terms representing such 
factors as wind, current, and shallow water.
  Several propeller and rudder factors affect the de- 
gree of ship response, including configurations of pro- 
peller, hull and rudder, propeller RPM, and rate  of 
RPM change. Also, the ship's linear and angular ve- 
locities strongly influence propeller/rudder force, as 
does rudder angle and its rate of movement. Similarly 
the ship's hydrodynamic environment; i.e., the water 
density, depth, lateral boundaries and waves also affect 
propeller/rudder forces. For this reason, even with the 
computer's capability to handle many terms, we usu- 
ally have to make simplifications, either because of


Esso	Suez
191,000 27,000
Hull	dwt	dwt
Length  between  perpendiculars, L, ft.	1000	612
Beam, B, ft	154.8	82.5
Draft, H, ft..	60.5	31.5
Block coefficient, Cb •••••••••••••••••••	0.83	0.75
Displacement, 1:1, long tons	221,400 34,100
Deadweight, long tons	191,350 27,000 
Shaft horsepower, maximum
continuous ahead	30,000	12,700
Design  propeller rpm, ahead	80	112
Propeller


(m = 3.28 ft.)


limited data or to avoid obscuring the central issue of 
the study.
  Straight path stopping, with continuous application  
of astern power, is realistic only from modest 
approach speeds or when special means are provided 
for con- trolling heading; however, the assumption is 
useful when comparing proposals for shortening the 
stopping maneuver.
  In this section, the effects of several ship design and 
operating parameters are demonstrated.  Stopping  of 
the 27,000 dwt former Esso Suez  is shown in Fig. 68  
to show how well the ship's predicted stopping time 
history compares with the ship's trial results. Main 
particulars of the two ships are given in Table 11.




 


 	 




  To show the effect of initial ship speed, ship speed 
and distance time histories during stopping maneuvers 
were computed for a number of approach  speeds  of 
the fully loaded 190,000-dwttanker. These are  shown 
in Figs. 69 and 70, together with the 27,000-dwt Esso 
Suez results. In Fig. 70 the final stopping  time  and 
head reach values of the 190,00O-dwttanker are sum- 
marized, together with results for different levels of


demand astern RPM. Astern  thrust  
predominates when stopping a large tanker on a 
straight path from moderate speed. Propeller 
cavitation, however, could cause a significant 
reduction of astern thrust when RPM astern is 
more than about 70 percent of maximum 
ahead.
The important  result  is that  there  is only a 
decrease
of  about  20 to  25 percent  of  the  original  head reach


 





by increasing the absorbed astern horsepower by as 
much as 100 percent (Le., by increasing horsepower 
from about 30 to 60 percent of maximum ahead). This 
is because astern thrust increases by  only about  the 
2/3 power of shp. Also, the time lag in reversing RPM 
tends to dilute the resulting thrust increase.
  The net effect of ship  size on stopping  head  reach 
is shown on Fig. 71. Trial data points for full-scale 
vessels are shown, together with,  computed  curves. 
All the trial data are from ships' service speeds which 
average around 15 knots (+ 1.5). Information is not 
available on heading and lateral deviations of these 
ships, so the data show only general trends. They are 
shortened to some extent by  speed  reduction  effects 
of unintentional turning.
Stopping head reach and time to stop vary almost
directly with ship's displacement, if we assume that 
astern thrust is affected only slightly by changes of 
propeller submersion. With this assumption, Fig. 72 
shows the effect of loading condition on stopping a 
191,000-dwt tanker from 16 knots.
  Stopping results from slow speeds of up to about 6 
knots are shown in Fig. 73. The independent  variable 
is absorbed astern horsepower, with corresponding 
values of astern RPM and shaft torque shown. Head 
reach and time are normalized in the figure by dividing 
the results obtained at 55 RPM astern.
For  large  tankers,  stopping  is relatively insensitive
to time lag in reversing the engine. On the other  hand 
it may be important for relatively light, high speed 
vessels, where thrust is large compared to ship's mass.
  10.8	Coasting. Coasting with the propeller wind- 
milling consists of reducing the ahead power to that 
level necessary to cause the propeller to rotate without 
producing any thrust. In this case, the ship would be 
slowed solely by its hull resistance. When  coasting 
with  the  propeller  stopped,  the  ship would be slowed


262	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




90'4



80'4 .0.
.":'c.
.z..
70'4 O
u
><
:I!
:I!

60-,.


ment, Xu was taken as -0.08 m, and n as 2, 
in accor­ dance with earlier assumptions.  An 
interesting  result of the assumption that n = 
2 is that the distance traveled in coasting to a 
given fraction of the initial speed is 
independent of the magnitude of the initial 
speed. This of course would not be true if n 
were other than 2 (see Table 10).
  The resistance augment, 6R, of a locked 
propeller needed in connection with Table 12 
may be estimated from the conventional drag 
formulation:
6R  = Cv(pl 2)A V 2
	(94
)


:I!
50'4



0


where
A = the developed area of the propeller in  
square feet.
V = velocity of flow in feet per second. In this 
case















•BASEO ON ESSO 191,000 OWT TANKER AT
APPROACH SPEEDS UP TO 6 KNOTS
•RPM TIME· LAG 90 SEC
•NORMALIZED ON RESULTS WITH - 55 RPM




1    -  -..2...0..·.-.,. -'--3-0-¾-'--4-0•-,. --'-!>-o·-,.
SHP ASTERN/SHPMAX CONT AHEAD


40¾:

§
30'4 i"
ga:
' z
20-,.








---,c--.,.o"-


V corresponds to the speed of 
advance, VA =
(1 - w)Vo.
w = hull wake fraction.
Cv = is a nondimensional 
drag coefficient. 
Hewins, et al (1950) 
estimate the value of 
CD for a locked 
propeller as 1.0.
p = is the mass density of sea water; 
p/2 = 1.0 for
sea water.
  The added drag of a locked 
propeller computed on this 
basis is very large. 
Computations show that the 
ratio of 6R/Rn in the speed 
range when n = 2 ranges from 
less than 150 for very large, 
slow-speed ships to about 3.0 
for large, fast  twin-screw  
passenger  liners. In other 
words, a locked propeller can 
constitute al­


Fig. 73 Dimensionless presentation of effects of astern ship on stopping
characteristics (Crane, 1973)


by its hull resistance plus the resistance of the locked 
propeller. In practice, the propeller's RPM is likely to 
be slightly less than its zero-slip value, so that it exerts 
some sternward thrust. With feedback engine control 
it may cycle between very slow ahead and astern. A 
workable measure of coasting behavior is the distance 
traveled by the ship to reach a specified fraction of 
the initial steady ahead speed.
  Equations (92) and (93) for estimating stopping dis­ 
tance and time apply also to coasting with the follow­ 
ing exceptions:
  (a)	The final speed is not zero but some specified 
fraction of Vo•
  (b)	With propeller windmilling, astern thru1?t, T11  is 
zero.
  (c)	With the propeller locked, T1 is also zero but 
the hull resistance R is augmented by the added drag 
of the propeller, 6R, so that R = Rh + 6R.


most as much drag,  and  in some cases 
several  times as much, as does the ship itself. 
These values used in association with 
Equation (94) and Table 12 indicate that 
coasting distances may be reduced by a factor 
of between two and four if the propellers are 
locked in­ stead of allowed to windmill.
  10.9	Backing Times, Distances, and 
Velocities. The survey of ship operator opinion 
conducted in connec­ tion with Chase, et al 
(1957) indicated that while there

 ESSO 191,000 
DWT TANKER 
DEMAND 
ASTERN RPM-
55 RPM TIME 
LAG 90 
SECONDS
(TOTAL WATER RESISTANCE EXPRESSED AS MULTIPLE OF BASIC HULL 
RESISTANCE)
6'...-----------------
--,


The  ahead  thrust  T0


is assumed to go to 
zero in­


6KNOrs


!IKNOrs


stantaneously at "execute." As a result of this as­ 
sumption, 6D and 6T of Equations (92) and (93) are 
taken as zero.
  Table 12 gives equations developed in Chase, et al 
(1957) from Equations (92) and Fig. 63 that are useful 
for estimating coasting distances. For this develop-





5	20
TOTAL WATER RESISTANCE/ BASIC HULL RESISTANCE

Fig. 74 Added hydrodynamic resistance effect on headreach, 
showing im­ portance of approach speed; hull resistance 
supplemented by brake flaps, water  parachutes, etc.


 




is agreement that ability to stop from harbor speed is 
important, many operators feel that backing  time 
should be established primarily on the basis of ma- 
neuverability around docks. In the case of clearing a 
ship slip, the astern speed achieved after the ship has 
traveled one ship length may be an adequate criterion 
for judging backing speed. However, a poll of the op- 
erators did not suggest what that speed should be, but 
rather indicated that experience and the particular hy- 
drographic conditions would dictate the desirable as- 
tern speed.
  The astern speed, V; reached in differential time at 
starting from rest may be obtained by equating the 
product of the instantaneous accelerating force, X, 
times the distance traveled,  S, to  the  kinetic  energy 
of the ship at the speed V. Thus

  10.10	Auxiliary Stopping Device •. Resistance is a 
major contributor to stopping force at high ship speeds 
and is roughly proportional to the  square  of  speed. 
For this reason, devices such as water parachutes and 
brake flaps which utilize hydrodynamic resistance are 
relatively ineffective for ship stopping from moderate 
speeds, and that is where unplanned stops are most 
likely.
  In Fig. 74 the total resistance of a  190,000-dwt 
tanker (hull resistance plus added resistance) has been 
varied to represent effects of hydrodynamic stopping 
devices such as parachutes  and  brake  flaps.  Curves 
are drawn for stopping from 3, 6, 9, 12, and 16 knots. 
The total  augmented  resistance  is  expressed  here  as 
a multiplier of the basic hull resistance. The results 
show that ships moving at slow maneuvering  speeds 
can benefit very little from added hydrodynamic re- 
sistance, even if as much as twenty times normal hull 
resistance (See also Clarke, 1971).
To consider effectiveness of nonhydrodynamic stop-


ping devices, a fixed retarding force, such as a rocket 
motor is examined by simulation. In Fig. 75, the 
effects of adding as much as 400 tons retarding force 
(equiv- alent to the takeoff thrust of forty Boeing 707 
jet engines) is shown for the case of the  190,000-dwt 
tanker stopping from 6, 12, and 16 knots. The added 
retarding force is assumed maintained until the tanker 
stops. Somewhat greater effect might be obtained by 
increasing the amount of force at the high speed be- 
ginning of the maneuver, and shortening its duration. 
Tugboats are  regularly  used  to  provide  stopping 
forces at slow harbor  speeds  and  are,  therefore,  part 
of the ship control system. Tugs are normally assumed 
fixed to the tanker in power tie-up so that the forward 
speed of the tanker and tugs is always the same. The 
effect of tugboats is essentially that of an added con-
stant retarding force.
  Figure 76 shows results from a simulation of the 
effects of tugs stopping a 190,000-dwttanker (Crane, 
1973).Tanker demand RPM is treated as a parameter. 
With fewer than two tugs and zero tanker RPM, stop- 
ping time and head reach are extremely long and not 
shown. The astern thrust of a 1,500-shp tug is repre- 
sented in the simulation as a function of  the  tug's 
astern RPM and forward speed. Effects of tug hull 
resistance, mass, and added mass are included, but 
hydrodynamic interaction effects with the tanker are 
neglected. Each tug is assumed fully utilized for re- 
tarding the tanker making no contribution to direc- 
tional control. From zero to six tugs are considered at 
tanker approach speeds of three and six knots. Above 
six knots, tugs are impractical due  to  the  difficulties 
of tying up.
  Figure 76 emphasizes that approach speed  and 
tanker astern RPM have much more effect than num- 
ber of tugs (provided that the tanker uses at least 40 
RPM astern). Also, the case of zero tanker RPM with 
six tugs hauling astern yields about the same  head 
reach as with 55 RPM astern and no tugs. With mod- 
ern, more powerful tugs, of course, comparable tug


264	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


braking  force  can be  achieved with  fewer  units than	on the use of tugs  in a  braking  situation.  Adequate  
in this case. Kroda (1977)provides some valuable work	steering control is, of course, a separate consideration.




CONTROLLABILITY	265
from equations of yaw and sway motions and rudder 
control:


DESIRED HEADING	


\fl =


I4
n=l

L4



lfinecr•nt•

,



(heading angle)	(100)




Fig. 77 Definition diagram for heading error


v' =



n=l


vne cr'nt'	(sideslip velocity)	(101)




possessed differerent values of its inherent hydrody­ 
namic derivatives.
  From Equation (14c) then, when Y (N + k2N R ) > 
N (Y - A' + k2 Y R) the ship would be stable having 
negative stability roots (cr1 and cr2) and exhibiting no 
hysteresis loop in a plot of r vs 8R.
It follows that a ship that is unstable with controls
fixed can be made to be stable in terms of both straight­ 
line and directional stability by the use of automatic 
controls. According to Equation (14b), stability is im­ 
proved  as (Y'r  -  A') increases  in  positive  value,  and 
as N'r increases in negative value. Since Y'8 is always 
positive and N'r is always negative for rudders at the 
stern and since k 2 is positive, it follows that automatic 
controls designed in accordance with Equation (96) will 
improve stability.
  Although not practical for a number of ship types, 
a desired ship characteristic is that it be stable with 
controls fixed so that automatic controls should not be 
used to overcome the inherent instability of a ship but 
rather to provide it with directional stability in addition 
to straight-line stability.
  11.3	Automatic Control of Unstable Vessels. Eda 
(1971) has developed an approach for examining the 
effect of applying automatic control to vessels with 
varying degrees of inherent dynamic stability.
  The following rudder  control  model is an example 
of an idealized simple autopilot expressed in a non­ 
dimensional manner:
   ad  =  k1(l/J -   lfJR) + k2 ' + a. =  aR + t 6k	(99) 
where
8d = rudder command
8R = actual rudder angle
t'r = time constant in rudder  activation  =  0.1 
k1 = yaw-gain constant
k 2 = yaw-rate gain constant
and subscript e indicates the value at the equilibrium


{>R = L AneCTnt	(rudder angle)	(102)
n=l
where \fin, V' n and An are constants depending upon 
the initial conditions, and er' n are the eigenvalues  of 
the system, which are determined by nontrivial solu­ 
tions of the following characteristic equations:
PoCT' n4 + PiCT'n3 + P2CT'n2 + PaCT'n + p4 = 0	(103)
  If the real parts of all roots of the characteristic 
equation have a negative sign (R,cr < O), the system 
is stable. In determining whether or not the system is 
stable, it is sufficient to know the sign of the real 
parts of the roots only.
  On the other hand, if all the roots are determined, 
more detailed characteristics of the system can be 
ob­ tained. Time constants and frequencies of the 
system can be determined from the real and 
imaginary parts of the roots, respectively. 
Furthermore, the solution vector can be determined 
from the initial conditions, and the actual ship 
dynamic response to any distur­ bance can be 
computed readily, if required. Accord­ ingly, 
eigenvalues of the system can be directly 
determined on a digital computer for a wide range of 
control gain constants.
  Stability roots were determined in Eda (1974) for 
three ships:
Ship A: Dynamically stable  ship (stability  index 
er = -0.377, l/B = 7)
Ship B: Dynamically unstable ship (er; = 0.164,
l/B = 5)
Ship C: Very dynamically stable ship (er;= 0.425,
l/B = 4)
for the following range of control systems 
character­ istics:
Yaw gain	 
Yaw-rate gain k 2 = 0 to 5


conditions and yaw gain and yaw-rate gain constants
?, k1 and k 2 respectively, are based on nondimensional 
values (e.g., nondimensional time and shiplengths of 
travel, t Ull).
  Stability of heading angle can be examined  using 
this rudder control model and the following set of 
solutions of perturbation equations, which are derived


Time constant	t' = 0 to 2
  Fig. 78 shows examples of stability roots for one 
gain and time constant and Fig 79 shows the 
resulting directionally stable regions for the three 
ships. The abscissa and the ordinate represent yaw-
rate and yaw gain, respectively. The figure reveals 
the.following:


 




  (a)	Yaw gain must be positive to achieve directional 
stability whereas yaw-rate gain can be negative under 
certain conditions (Le., when the ship has sufficient 
inherent dynamic stability or when sufficiently large 
yaw gain is simultaneously used).
  (b)	Three ships, having widely ranging degrees of 
dynamic stability, show a similar trend in stability 
change with changes in yaw and yaw-rate gains. Slopes 
of curves for neutral stability  are  roughly  the  same 
for these three ships; the only major  difference is in  
the location of the intersection on the yaw-rate gain 
axis.
  (c)	Inherent dynamic instability can be eliminated 
by adding hydrodynamic damping through the rudder 
by mean of yaw-rate gain control. A ship with a greater 
degree of inherent instability requires a greater  value 
of yaw-rate gain to achieve directional stability (when 
yaw gain is fixed).
  It should be recognized  that  stable  regions  shown 
in Figure 79 are results of the eigenvalue analysis  of 
the linear system so that the results are only valid for 
the case where deviations from the equilibrium con- 
ditions are very small. For example, a limit in available 
rudder angle in an actual system is not included in the 
analysis. When large values of  gain  constants  are 
used, there exists a possibility of saturation in rudder 
angle which can introduce the instability into the sys- 
tem during actual operation.
  

Accordingly, results for the very unstable Ship C 
should be treated with caution because of the possi- 
bility of rudder angle saturation due to the large gain 
constants required for directional stability. Further- 
more, there are  certain  limitations  in  the  magnitude 
of gain constants in actual  operations  depending  on 
the kind of maneuver. For example, a large yaw-rate 
gain constant (e.g., k2 > 0.75)would not be acceptable 
for operation in a seaway because excessive rudder 
activity could be introduced due to yawing in waves. 
(Although steering gear machinery can operate con- 
tinuously for hours, hunting or other high frequency 
movements caused by such wave induced yawing 
would be particularly hard on the system). These re- 
sults indicate possible difficulties in handling of a very 
unstable ship such as Ship C.
   11.4	Input   Data    and   Time Lag  En.dl.	All 
auto- matic control systems operate using certain state, 
or input data such as heading, yaw  rate.  Heading  and 
yaw rate can be readily determined using a gyro com- 
pass and rate gyro. Position, for dynamic positioning 
systems, or is usually determined using sonar sending 
units or pingers placed at known locations on the ocean 
bottom or by using a satellite-based inertial navigation 
system.
  Adaptive autopilots also use a number of additional 
methods to improve upon the relatively simple rudder 
control model, especially for use in severe bow seas,


CONTROLLABILITY	267



Equation (99). These include:
  (a)	Addition of an acceleration gain term, k3
where ij,' is yaw acceleration;




ij,'




YAW GAIN k,
Q


(b)	Addition of a track error gain term, k4 y' , where
y' is distance from desired track (nondimensional).
  (c)	Use of low-pass and sophisticated filters to re­ 
duce or eliminate high-frequency rudder motions due 
to wave forces particularly for head and bow seas.
  The additional data required such as integrated po­ 
sition, and yaw acceleration, can be determined by 
integration or differentiation of measured data. The 
usual concerns about errors introduced by differentia­ 
tion of measured data, exist, however. Ship velocity, 
relative to the bottom, can be determined using a two­ 
axis Doppler system.
  Wind velocity and direction, when required as for a 
dynamic positioning system, can be readily determined 
from a shipboard anemometer. This anemometer must 
be so placed that there is negligible interference with 
ship structure regardless of wind direction.
In the case of coursekeeping, although 'tjl and iJ, may
be measured and signaled to the autopilot at time t, 
there are !ags in any control system and it  requires 
finite time t, for the rudder to reach the deflection angle 
prescribed by Equation (96). Hence, the deflection of 
the rudder, 6R at time t_is proportional to 'tjl and ti, at 
an earlier time,  t1   = t -   t. In functional form, Equation
(96)	becomes:
6R(t) = k1lj,(t  -   t)  + k2ti,(t .-  t)	(104)
where t is the time lag of the control system.
  Following Equation (7c) the linearized form of the 
Taylor expansion of (104) is:
  6Jt) = k1['tjl(t)  -  t (t)] + k 2[tj,(t) - tii,(t)]	(105)
Nondimensionalizing this equation, substituting it into 
Equation (12a), and dropping the functional notation
(t) which is implicit, the following is obtained:



ACCEPTABLE	UNACCEPTABLE













-1.0	-0.5	0	0.5	1.0
YAW-RATE GAIN k2
Fig. 79 Region of directional stability



WAVE ORBITA E=LOCITY 
COMPONENTS
                                    AMPLITUDE OF OSCILLATING 
INFLOW ANGLE AMPLITUDE	VERTICAL ORBITAL COMPONENT
Fig. 80 Hydrofoil craft in regular ahead waves (Abkowitz, 1964)







 



+ (Y' -  A'+k 2Y' 8-	k;t'Y'a)ij,'
+ (Y'ij, -  kzt'Y'a)ij,  = 0
N' vV 1 + (N';,)v 1 + k1Na't/l
+ (N'tj, + k2N'a - k1tN'a)tj,'




(106)




Fig. 81 Illustration of hydrofoil platforming and contouring 
modes


  (a)	The existence of a time lag, t, 
detracts from the stability of the ship 
compared to zero time lag.


+ (N'ij, - /', - k 2t 'N ' 8)'tjl' = 0
where t' = (t)(V/ L).
Again, comparing terms of the criterion, C, Equation
  

(b)	If automatic controls were made sensitive only 
to 'tjl, and not to ij,, (k2 = 0) and a time lag existed,
the stability of the ship with controls would be less 
than without controls. It is conceivable that this de­


(13b), it is noted that the term (Yr' - A') now appears


crease in stability could cause a ship that was stable


as (Y'r - A' + k 2 Y' 8 - k1t ' Y,  8) and  the  term  N'r 
appears as (N'r + k 2N ' 8- k1t ' N ' 8)  .  Two important 
facts emerge from these comparisons:


without controls to become unstable with controls.
  11.5	Automatic  Control of Hydrofoils.	It is 
partic­ ularly difficult, if not impossible, to manually 
control


268	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


a  high-speed  hydrofoil  craft  with  a fully submerged		to handle both of the above modes of operation. During 
foil system operating  in rough water.  Such craft there-	early developments of hydrofoils, control systems uti- 
fore  depend on an  automatic  control  system that  con-	lized input sensors for spatial anticipation of oncoming 
stantly   adjusts   foil  angle   of  attack, either  through	waves. These mechanical devices were known as "feel- 
changes  in  foil incidence or  flap angle. These adjust-	ers," or a stinger projecting ahead of the craft. The 
ments  are  made to port  and starboard,  as well as fore	modern hydrofoil control system uses either a  sonic 
and  aft  foils  to  maintain  trim  and  keep the  hull at a	or radar height sensor, or both. These devices contin- 
given  height   above  the   mean  water   surface in the	ually measure the distance to the water surface and 
presence  of disturbances.  In  order  to achieve as high	input signals  to  the  control  system,  which,  together 
a  lift-to-drag  ratio  as  possible in the cruise condition,	with other autopilot inputs, provide signals to the hy- 
the  foils are  designed  to operate  with relatively small	draulically actuated foil system. An improvement is 
mean  incidence or  flap angles.  This  then provides ad-	currently being developed and is called a Forward 
equate  reserve  to generate  the required control forces.	Looking Radar Height Sensor. This device will deter- 
This is necessary  because  of the  changes  in foil angle	mine wave height well ahead of the  hydrofoil  and  in 
of attack  resulting  from the  orbital velocities of waves	sufficient time, switch from one mode to the other to 
(see Fig. 80)which, if not compensated for, can produce	minimize not only ship motion, but loads imposed on 
significant craft  excitations.	the foil, hydraulic systems, and hull.
  In  general,  these  excitations  must  be compensated      11.6    Dynamic Positioning  Systems.     Dynamic posi- 
for  by the  control system  if the  craft  is to fly straight  tioning  (DP) systems,  which are  described  in Section 
and level and remain foilborne in large waves without 1.7 of Chapter XII in Taggart (1980),are used to main- 
excessive cresting of the hull or broaching of the foils. tain a vessel within a specified watch circle, or radius 
Broaching refers to a condition when the foil breaks from a specified location, to facilitate  operations  such 
through  the water  surface,  losing its lift, possibly caus-  as  offshore drilling for  oil or mine hunting.  A typical 
ing  the  craft  to go hullborne.	watch  circle  radius  is  five percent  of  water  depth, a
  There  are  two  modes  in  which  a hydrofoil control		value based  on extensive  operating  experience. 
system   operates,   namely,  the  platforming mode and			Brink and Stuurman (1979),have provided a detailed 
contouring  mode. As  the  name  implies, in the former	description of a DP system for minehunters. This is 
mode  the  craft  flies at  given  height  above the  mean	termed a PID system which uses position (P), integral 
water   surface,   as  illustrated   in  Fig.  81, and is con-	or cumulative time average of position (I), and differ- 
trolled automatically  so that  there  is minimum motion.	ential of position or velocity away from  the  desired 
The  limit  on this  mode is  a  function  of wave height	position (D). The role of model test data in tuning the 
and  foil system  strut   length.  When  wave height  and	system is discussed, as is the important subject of feed- 
steepness  exceed a value where  the  ship can no longer	forward. Feed-forward is used to anticipate future mo- 
"platform,"    the   operator   resorts   to the  contouring	tions by sampling variables, such as wind velocity and 
mode, in which  the  hydrofoil  flies approximately par-	direction, which vary slowly and thus have a  direct 
aIleI to  the  smoothed  contour  of  the  sea  surface  or	influence on future events. To date, feed forward has 
nearly  follows  the wave contour.	been limited to wind effects, as wave and current  char-
  In modern  hydrofoils,  such  as  the  US Navy  PHM,  acteristics  are  hard to measure,  and wave elevation is 
the time constants of the control system are sufficient highly transient.


Section  12
Effects of the Environment
  12.1	Introdudion. Ship controllability can be sig- it is necessary to develop information concerning wind 
nificantly affected by the  immediate  environment  effects on ship controllability  under  various  situations 
(wind, waves, and current). Environmental forces can and to analyze the problem discovered to exist. A mea- 
cause reduced coursekeeping stability or complete loss sure  of  control  can  be  achieved  by  varying  the  ship 
of ability to maintain a desired course. They can also characteristics, such  as  hull  profile, rudder  size,  and  
cause increased resistance to a ship's forward motion, other  design  variables  and  by  adding  thrust  devices 
with consequent demand for additional power to make (See Section 17).
good  a given speed.	Effects of a given wind increase in a direct ratio to
  12.2	Dynamic Behavior in Wind. When the ratio of (a) above water area, (b)  distance  from  the  center  of 
wind velocity to ship speed is large, wind has an ap- lateral area to the  LCG, and  (c)  aerodynamic  drag 
preciable effect on ship control. Even a moderate wind coefficients. Since some types  of  ships  such  as  auto- 
can make a ship advancing at slow speed difficult to mobile carriers, containerships, and LNG ships  have  
control. To provide adequate control of ships in wind, relatively large windage areas due to high freeboard,


CONTROLLABILITY	269












..<
>-
iz-:
uu.:.
w
0
(.)
w
2






1.
4


1.
2


1.
0


0.
8


0.
6



Y
A
	
W
i
n
d
	
x
YA
' 
=  
..e_ 
A
U 
2
2
	
A


0z	0.4 -





30	40	50	60	70	80	90	100	110	120	130

\ Beam Wind	Wind Direction, +A
Fig. 82 Nondimensional aerodynamic side-force coefficients for many ships



the low-speed handling characteristics of such ships 
are critically influenced by wind.
Fig. 82 shows examples of nondimensional aerodyn­


surface are given, as shown in Fig. 83 with 
reference to Fig. 2 the ship's x and y axis 
components of ship velocity relative to the air are:


amic side-force coefficients for many ships plotted 
against wind direction. These data show a fairly even 
pattern of distribution with respect to a coefficient 
amplitude of about 1.0.
The equations of motion can be modified to include





where


Ua = u + Ua (cos if, + if,)
Va = V - Ua (sin ifia + if,)


(110)
(111)


nondimensionalized aerodynamic surge and sway



0
if,


is speed (velocity) of wind
is direction from which wind arrives relative to the


forces  and  yawing  moments   X   Ya  and Na, respec­	0


tively. These additional forces and moments are de­ 
fined by the following equations:


earth-fixed coordinate axes.
  When the wind/ ship velocity ratio is moderate, op­ 
eration in such wind is possible, using the rudder to


Xa - -  12 PaUa2Aaz- -   X'a 1
1


pu2£2


(107)


maintain a desired course. But 
when this velocity ratio increases, 
stable coursekeeping may not be 
possible for wide ranges of  wind 
heading angle, if,0 •




 
where
Pa is air mass density


Y' - pu2L2
a


(108)

(109)
  

Thus, in order to maintain 
a predetermined straight 
course in a moderate wind, 
some degree of rudder angle 
is required to counteract the 
aerodynamic and 
hydrodynamic forces and 
moments. When ship speed 
and heading, and wind 
velocity and direction are 
given, then the required 
rudder angle can be 
determined to


U0    and V0     are longitudinal and transverse components
of relative wind velocities, resp.
A= and Aay are maximum longitudinal and transverse 
projections, respectively, of aerodynamic area.
Xac is the longitudinal coordinate of the center of trans­ 
verse aerodynamic force relative to midships.
  When the magnitude and the direction of wind ve­ 
locity relative to the "'o and Yo axes fixed on the earth's


produce the necessary sideslip of the ship for a 
straight course, if the following coefficient values are 
available:
"d	1·	y  N	-   N	y
1  es 1p,  v.  =  N'  Y'  _ Y' N'	(112)
V	8	V	8
N' Y' - Y' N'
Rudder  angle, 6R =	Nav
	(113)


270	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


  Typical computed results for required rudder angle 
and sideslip, as functions of wind velocity, are graphed 
in Fig. 84 for a Mariner cargo ship. The figure shows 
that for a given wind-to-shipvelocity ratio greater rud- 
der angles are required when the wind is from the 
beam.
  Since the maximum rudder angle of many ships is 
limited to 35 degrees, the ship will not be generally 
controllable in a wind that requires a rudder  angle 
close to this limit. For example, Fig. 84 shows that the 
ship (a mariner-class vessel at full-load condition) will 
not be controllable at some headings when beam-wind 
velocity is relatively large (Ua = lOV). The combined 
aerodynamic and hydrodynamic effects then exceed the 
capacity of the rudder. On the other hand,  the  ship 
may be controllable in wind of the  same  magnitude 
but from another direction. The directional stability of 
the system must then be examined further. Other com- 
puted results indicate that the stability requirement 
presents a critical wind velocity lower than that re- 
sulting from the 35-degree rudder angle for maintain- 
ing the desired course.
  A stability analysis of a typical ship affirms other 
interesting aspects of ship behavior in wind. Eigen- 
values or stability roots of an unsteered ship in wind 
from the bow were solved for on a computer. Real and 
imaginary parts of critical roots (the root with the 
algebraically greatest real part is called the  critical 
root) are shown on the basis of wind velocity in Fig.


CONTROLLABILITY	271
"MARINER" CLASS CARGO SHIP 
FULL LOAD CONDITION



-0.4

Fig. 85 ReCT' and lmCT' versus wind speed (unsteered ship)

85.	The horizontal axis in the  figure represents relative	out oscillations. The rate of divergence increases with
wind speed  (U 1    )   .    The figure  shows that the ship will	increasing values of U' •


be neutral at U' = 0, implying that the ship has no 
preferred heading under this condition of no wind.
  When the wind approaches the ship from the bow 
(U 0 > 0), this ship's motion may be characterized by 
three different properties of stability depending on the


0
  Stability analysis of automatically steered ships in 
wind from an arbitrary  direction  leads  to solution  of 
a fifth-order characteristic equation. Fig. 86 shows real 
parts of critical roots with variations of wind velocity. 
The figure indicates that the ship will be stable in wind


magnitude of  U'0     as  follows:


that is not strong (U	5V) 
and blows from near the


(a)	0  <  U'0      < 3 stable, nonoscillatory case	bow ( -50°	l/}0	50 degrees, ship lateral symmetry


(b)	3 < U'


< 11 stable, 
oscillatory 
case


assumed). 
The ship 
will be 
unstable in 
the same 
mag­


(c)	11 < U' unstable, oscillatory case


nitude of wind from other directions. The 
degree of


0
  In cases (a) and (b), the ship tends to maintain the 
original course without the application of control
forces. When the bow wind exceeds certain values 
(U '00 0     = 3 ), the imaginary parts of certain of the roots


instability  is greatest  in  wind  from  the stern  (l/}0      =
180 degrees).
  These results show that the unsteered ship will gen­ 
erally be more unstable as wind velocity increases. It


are  not  zero  and  increase  with  U'0      as  shown  in  the	can be shown that great improvement in stability in a
figure.  This  behavior   implies  that  the frequency  of	wind  can  be achieved  by using a  well-designed auto­
oscillatory  motion increases with U'0  •	matic control system  instead  of  a  human  helmsman,


  The ship is always unstable in wind from the stern, or  
when  U'0        <  0. With  an increase  in  wind  velocity 
from the stern, the instability of the ship increases 
monotonically. Imaginary parts of the critical roots in 
this case are zero, implying that ship motions in wind 
from the stern after perturbation tend to diverge, with-


even one who is highly experienced.
  12.3	Current Effeds. Ocean or waterway current 
affects controllability in a manner somewhat different 
from that of wind. The effect of current is usually 
treated by using the relative velocity between the ship 
and the water, particularly in maneuvering simulation


272	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



















p
0
cu
0:









-02




-0.4








Fig. 
86 
Recr 
vers
us 
win
d 
dire
ctio
n 
(uns
teere
d 
ship
)



Rec,; < 0 STABLE 
MOTION






studies. Using a definition of current velocity vector 
analogous to that for wind in Fig. 83 relative velocities 
are defined as:
U  = U  + Uc COS (l/Jc + l/J)	(114)
v = v + Uc sin (\fie + tf,)	(115)
  Where  U0    and  tf,0     are  current  velocity  (drift)  and 
current direction (reciprocal to set) relative to earth­ 
fixed coordinate axes.
  Local surface current velocities in the open  ocean 
are generally modest and close to constant in the hor­ 
izontal plane. Such currents do not present difficulties 
for open-sea controllability. Currents do, however, be­ 
come important in restricted waters where ship op­ 
erating speeds are often low and currents nonuniform. 
They are most likely to create a controllability problem 
for a vessel traveling downstream in a river or canal 
that carries significant current, particularly in bends, 
where significant spatial current  velocity  gradients 
tend to occur. Navigation safety often necessitates low 
operating speeds over the bottom and  the  resulting  
low relative speed through water, u-vci may be too 
small to develop adequate rudder force and  force on 
the hull.
  Ship handling simulators, Section 16.9, provide an 
ideal means for evaluating such effects. Miller (1978) 
describes a simulator study that included detailed mod-


eling of river currents and their effect on river tow 
safety. In fact, detailed water current studies are 
often a necessary input to simulator studies where a 
port entrance (or waterway with tributaries) has 
significant cross flows present from tides, etc.
  12.4	Stability and Control in Waves. Waves  can 
have significant effect on coursekeeping and maneu­ 
vering. A ship attempting to maintain a steady  course 
in rough seas experiences wave-induced oscillatory 
mo­ tions in all six degrees of freedom.  In Chapter  
VIII it is shown that in the linear theory of ship 
motions in waves the coupled transverse responses of 
sway, yaw, and roll can generally be considered 
separately from pitch, heave, and surge. However, the 
main interest is in roll and to some extent in sway. 
This chapter con­ cerns mainly yaw and sway, which 
have been seen to be closely related to each other even 
in calm  water. Roll is also involved in controllability, 
especially in high-speed ships. Turning can cause roll 
(or heel) and rolling can affect steering.
  In the case of head and bow seas, where the fre­ 
quency of encounter with waves causing yawing 
and swaying is comparatively high, and where 
course sta­ bility is usually large, serious difficulties 
seldom occur. The experienced helmsman ignores the 
high-frequency yawing and steers in relation to the 
mean ship heading. In using automatic controls, the 
tendency is for the system to call for high-frequency 
rudder movements


CONTROLLABILITY	273


that  produce increased  resistance  but  have little effect		(a)	Frequencies of wave encounter are low, so that 
on ship heading.  Hence,  it is desirable  to select appro-	large roll as well as  yaw  moments  can  build up. 
priate   control  settings,   or  to  introduce filtering  into		(b)	High-speed ships generally have relatively low 
the  system,  to  minimize unnecessary rudder motions,	static transverse stability (low GM).
as  done  in adaptive  autopilots (Section 11).			(c)	Significant changes in static stability occur in 
As  shown  in  Section  6.5, yaw-roll rudder  coupling	waves, which affect roll and hence yaw (Oakley, Paull- 
often  occurs  when a ship is turning.  This effect is due		ing and Wood, 1974). For example, for following seas 
to  the  rudder,   which  produces  a  heeling moment as		with wave crests at the bow and stern, the middle of 
well as a yawing moment. Fig. 87 presents a simulation		the ship is in a trough. This portion, therefore, develops 
of a vessel  that  shows yaw-roll coupling effects. Other		much less righting moment; hence large roll angles
coupling  effects  are   often   experienced  when a  ship	occur.
proceeds at high speed in quartering or following seas. (d) Since the  rudder  has  a  large  effect  on  roll  as 
Serious rolling motions associated with steering in well as on yaw,  the  design  characteristics  of  the  au- 
presence of waves are often observed in actual oper-  tomatic control system are of critical importance (Tag-  
ations of some ships and in model testing. Anomalous gart, 1970).
behavior  of  rolling  and  steering  was clearly evident,		(e)	High-speed ships  have  relative  fore-and-aft 
for  example,  in  full-scale  tests   of  a high-speed con-	asymmetry, which changes in rolling.
tainership   during  cross-Atlantic operations  (Taggart,			For these reasons, the possibility exists of significant 
1970).		coupling among yaw, sway, roll, and rudder action, as 
Under seagoing  conditions a number  of new factors	reported by de Santis and Russo (1936), especially in
enter, particularly  in the path of long overtaking waves	high-speed operations.
at  high speeds, because:	Figure 88 shows two sets of curves that indicate,





274	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



ROLL ANGLE• 0 Oeg	ROLL ANGLE• 15 Deg

FORWARD P.
I\
I    \
I	\
I	' I


Du Cane and Goodrich (1962) give an 
overview of the problem. They report 
model tests in following waves that 
demonstrated the large range of 
wavelengths over which the model 
was carried along at the wave crest 
speed.
  Wahab and Swaan (1964) investigated 
theoretically the problem of 
coursekeeping and broaching (turning


II	\
I	I
I
I 
I 
I 
I 
I
I
I	I





CG OF 
SECTIONAL 
AREA	I


b
r
o
a
d
s
i
d
e
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
w
a
v
e
s
)
 
i
n
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
i
n
g
 
s
e
a
s
 
b
y
 
c
o
n
c
e
n
­
 
t
r
a
t
i
n
g
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
a
b
o
v
e
-
c
i
t
e
d
 
l
i
m
i
t
i
n
g
 
c
o
n
d
i
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
s
h
i
p
'
s
 
s
p
e
e
d
  
e
q
u
a
l
  
t
o
 
w
a
v
e
  
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
 
(
z
e
r
o
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
  
o
f
   
e
n
­
\
	c
ounter). 
They  
assumed  
as self-
evident  
that 
difficulty
\
	
i
n
    
s
t
e
e
r
i
n
g
-
a
n
d
    
d
a
n
g
e
r
    
o
f
    
e
v
e
n
t
u
a
l
l
y
    
b
r
o
a
c
h
i
n
g
-
i
s
 
I
	
c
a
u
s
e
d
 
b
y
 
d
y
n
a
m
i
c
 
c
o
u
r
s
e
 
i
n
s
t
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
.
 
T
h
e
y
 
c
o
n
c
l
u
d
e
d
 
I
	
t
h
a
t
 
"
a
l
l
 
u
n
s
t
e
e
r
e
d
 
s
h
i
p
s
 
a
p
p
e
a
r
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
u
n
s
t
a
b
l
e
 
s
o
m
e
­


I
I 
I
I	I
\	I
I
I
I	I
\	II


I
'
       
w
h
e
r
e
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
d
o
w
n
w
a
r
d
 
s
l
o
p
e
 
o
f
 
a
 
w
a
v
e
.
"
 
H
e
n
c
e
,
 
t
h
e
y
   
I
	considered  the  characteristics  of  the  autopilot  to  be I	very important. Nevertheless, "a reduction of the
I
	g
er  of  
broaching  
can  be  
attained   
by  
increasing 
the
c
o
u
rs
e 
st
a
bi
li
ty 
o
f  
th
e 
s
hi
p 
in 
s
m
o
ot
h 
w
at
er
."  
H
o
w
­
e
v
er
, 
n
o 
o
n
e 
h
a
s 
b
e
e
n 
a
bl
e 
to 
s
p
e
ci
f
y 
e
x
a
ct
ly 
h
o
w 
m
u
c
h


1 DISTRIBUTION OF SECTIONAL AREA
I	/
I     /
'.I1·:I
I    I
11


course stability is 
enough, or the 
optimal amount. In 
fact, some writers 
assert that a superior 
control sys­ tem can 
overcome instability 
even in waves.
The definition 
diagram for a ship 
operating in reg­
ular waves is shown  in Fig. 90. 
According  to this dia­


AFT P.


A
F
T
 
P
.


-1.Sm	O	I.Sm

 
To  Port	To Stbd


gra
m, 
the 
peri
od 
and 
freq
uen
cy 
of 
enc
oun
ter 
bet
wee
n 
the 
shi
p 
and 
the 
wa
ves 
are:
T
 
=
	
L
w


'Vw-Vcosx


(115)


DISTANCE OF CG OF SECTIONAL AREA 
FROM CENTERLINE'
Fig. 88 longitudinal asymmetry due to heel




where


_
w, -


(Vw  -         V cos x)
TT	L
w


for a fast containership, the transverse distance of the
CG (centrum) of  the local sectional  area from the lon­


T, = period of encounter with component waves
w, = angular frequency of encounter with 
component


gitudinal centerline at roll angles cf>=0 and cf>=15 de­


Lw =


waves = 21r/T,


grees in calm water. The curves can be considered


length of wave components
V =


equivalent to the camberlines of a wing section.


ship velocity
V


  When heel angle is not zero, and ship speed is not 
zero, then the camberline is not a straight line (as 
shown in Fig. 88) and therefore introduces hydrody­ 
namic yaw moment and side force. This trend is made 
more pronounced by the fore-and-aft asymmetry of 
the hull form, particularly during high-speed opera­ 
tion. Most high-speed ships have a bulbous bow for 
the purpose of improving resistance characteristics. 
The increased fore-and-aft asymmetry due to this type 
of bow introduces greater athwartship asymmetry of 
underwater hull form when the ship is heeled. Auto­ 
matic control systems as discussed in Section 11 can 
be designed to help overcome unfavorable coupling. 
Figure 89 shows how the motions smooth out when 
an automatic control system yaw rate gain of 1.0 is 
applied to the simulation represented in Fig. 87.
12.5	Coursekeeping in Astern Seas.	Much more se­
rious steering and control difficulties are experienced 
by ship operators in quartering and following seas.


w = component wave velocity
x= angle from ship velocity vector to wave 
direction
of advance
It is evident from Fig. 90 and Equations (114) that
if  the seas are  approaching  from  ahead  (90 deg  <  x
< 270 deg), cos x is negative and the 
frequency of encounter w,, is higher than if 
the seas were approach­ ing from the stern 
(0 deg < x < 90 deg and 270 deg
<  x <  360 deg).  In astern  seas,  the term (Vw  - V
cos x) can be very small indeed and hence the 
fre­ quency of encounter very low. Largely 
because of this reduction in frequency of 
encounter, coursekeeping in astern seas 
usually poses more difficulty than in ahead 
seas even though it is by no means always 
easy in severe ahead seas. For this reason 
most studies of yaw motion in rough water 
have been concerned with as­ tern seas. An 
exception is work of Rydill (1959), who 
applies linear theory to the steering of  ships  
in ahead as well as astern seas.


CONTROLLABILITY	275
CONDITIONS:  1.	SHIP SPEED V • 33 KNOTS, L = 268.4 m
2. ROLL MOMENT APPLIED SUDDENLY


To Starboard


3. GM= 0.76m
4
.
	
A
U
T
O
P
I
L
O
T
 
W
I
T
H
 
Y
A
W
 
G
A
I
N
 
O
F
 
3
 
A
N
D
 
Y
A
W
-
R
A
T
E
 
G
A
I
N
 
O
F
 
1
.
0


10:··.
20	5




....	.........---
..R..o,i I   Angl_e, 	
··....._.....•·	--
--.


•	••	Rudder Angle
 	_
Heading Angle

To Port

Fig.  89    Simulated  roll-yaw-rudder coupled  motion



  It is important to distinguish the three possible sit- 
uations in astern seas:
(a)	V cos x < Vw ( overtaking seas)
(b)	V  cos  x =  Vw (  semistatic case)
(c)	V cos x >  Vw  (following seas)
In (a), the waves are overtaking the ship and the fre­ 
quency of encounter is low. These are called overtak­ 
ing seas (Mandel, 1960). In (b), the frequency of 
encounter is zero and if the ship is poised on the down
slope of a wave at time t = 0 it will remain so poised 
at time t = t1 • In these respects, this is a steady-state, 
time-invariant condition. In (c), the frequency of en-


counter may also be low [but of opposite sign to 
that in (a)] and the ship is overtaking the waves. 
These are called following seas (Mandel, 1960). To 
an observer aboard ship, the waves in this condition 
appear to be falling astern even though to an 
observer on land they appear to move in the 
opposite direction.
  In ahead seas (that is, seas approaching from ahead) 
and in situations (a) and (c), but not in  situation  (b), 
the sway exciting forces and the yaw exciting 
moments acting on a ship are oscillatory with time. 
This becomes evident from Fig. 90 if the orbital 
velocities of the waves are considered. When a ship is 
positioned as shown  in Fig. 90 with its  stern  at  a 
crest and  its bow
at a trough, the orbital velocities of  the  waves induce 
a destabilizing yaw moment on the ship unless x and



 
Fig. 90 Definition diagram for a ship operting in regular waves


276	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

WAVE DOUBLE AMPLITUDE= 11.43 cm , MODEL SIZE, FOR ALL WAVE LENGTHS.

0.65

0.60


.1.1,:0.55
:,
.z.,o.50
:Q,
0
f0.45

0.40


0.35


1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0	3.5	4.0	4.5
SPEED OF  WAVE  m  /SEC. ( MODEL)

30	40	50	60	70     80	90    100	120	140	160	180	200	220    240
WAVE LENGTH   m (SHIP)

 


1.0


1.5	2.0	25	3.0	3.5
WAVE LENGTH / SHIP LENGTH RATIO, 
Lw/L
VARIATION IN SPEED AT FU.LL POWER


4.0	4.5	5.0


Fig. 91 Variation of speed with wavelength in uniform astern seas (DuCane and Goodrich, 1962)


6r-------.-----..-------------,
SEE FIG. 90 FOR 
DEFINITION OF SYMBOLS 
ANO DIRECTION OF SIGNS




















-41------1---------------



/3 are precisely zero. When, after a 
time interval  of half the period of the 
encounter, the ship is positioned with 
its stern at a trough and its bow at a  
crest,  the yaw moment induced by the 
waves is a stabilizing moment tending 
to return the ship toward its original 
heading. In situation (b), since the ship 
does not change its position relative to 
the wave with time, the exciting forces 
and moments also do not vary with 
time.
  Experimental and predicted values 
of yaw ampli­ tudes, phase lags, yaw 
exciting moments, and sway exciting 
forces with controls fixed are given by  
Eda and Crane (1965) for a Series 60 
model (CB  =  0.60) in regular waves 
(0.5 < LwlL < 1.5) (x = 30 and 60 
deg) at low speeds (Fn ::; 0.24 or V = 
18 knots for a 500-ft ship), which 
correspond in all cases to overtak­
ing seas; that is, V cos x < Vw. The results of Eda
and Crane (1965) also show that the 
yaw amplitudes increase with 
increasing ship speed (as <.p, _...  0) but 
fall off sharply as the wave length is 
decreased from Lwl L = 1.0. They 
also decrease slightly as the wave 
length exceeds L (Lw/L > 1.0). 
Calculated results for variations in the 
longitudinal radius of gyration, k,


-6	...,,.  
o


..,..., 	


--	......,..,.. 	_,


show also that 
yaw 
amplitudes 
decrease 
significantly


0.2	o.4	o.6	o.e	1.0
•.1t..,,-
Fig. 92 Static equilibrium values of -4 for a destroyer travelling at same
 speed as a wave as a function of  wave amplitude  h and  position on wave, 
for I'=	-15 deg, Lw/L = 2, -, Fn = 0.565 (Wahab and Swaan, 196-4)


with increase in k. While the effect of 
corrective rudder action in reducing yaw 
amplitudes in overtaking seas was not 
shown by Eda and Crane (1965), this effect 
would be very small, because in general, 
wave exci-


CONTROLLABILITY	277



tations exert far larger forces than those that a rudder 
can exert.
  Although, theoretically, only small, fast ships can 
achieve the condition V cos x = V,.,[condition (b)] with 
wave components that are of significant length com­
pared to the ship (Lwl L 1.0), Grim (1965) indicates 
that ships may inadvertently be accelerated to this 
condition if they are operating in regular, astern seas 
of significant wavelength and if their initial calm-water 
speed exceeds a Froude number of 0.25 (VI v'L = 
0.84). or this reason, this condition is of great interest, 
and it has been extensively studied not only by Grim, 
but also by DuCane and Goodrich (1962) and Wahab 
and Swaan (1964).
  Results of the self-propelled model tests in astern 
seas reported by DuCane and Goodrich are reproduced 
in Fig. 91. This Figure shows model speed as a function 
of wave length in  uniform  astern  seas for two levels 
of model power output. For both power levels, a sig­






0.30











o.zo









0.10






MODEL   60 12
15•   FOLLOWING  SEA
1//sl.0   h•/ sl/41





♦0  (UNSTEEREO)


nificant surge amplitude exists with a mean speed 
fairly close to the calm-water speed in both the short 
waves corresponding to following seas and in the long 
waves corresponding to overtaking seas. However, in


o'---.....J..--.....J..--.....J..---'-----'-----
0.20	0.10	0.40
FROU0£  NUMIE lll F



the range of wave lengths such that 1.25 < Lwl L- <
2.4  in  Fig.  91,  the  surge  amplitude  is  zero  and the


9.0    1.0     7.0     6.0     5.0       4.0       :SD	2.0
"'•


1.0


model is accelerated by the waves above its calm-water 
speed to the speed of the waves. That is, in a large 
range of wavelengths, the waves carry the model along 
at speeds higher than its calm-water speed independent 
of the power delivered by the propellers. This phenom­ 
enon is, of course, well known to surf riders.
  Grim (1965) carried out a theoretical analysis of this 
phenomenon and in his discussion of the work of 
DuCane and Goodrich (1962) shows that his analysis 
yields excellent agreement with the experimental re­ 
sults.
  The equations of motion used by Wahab and Swaan 
(1964) with semistatic wave excitation functions can 
also be used to compute the static equilibrium orien­ 
tations, the controls-fixed stability, and the stability






1w301L<--,,,<-,,L,,L+-,L-,4-,,L,L,L,--------­
It:
c:,


Fig. 94 Oscillatory yaw motion and rudder angle


with automatic controls working of a destroyer posed at various 
positions on the profile of a wave traveling at the same speed as 
the destroyer (V cos x = V..,).
Fig. 92 shows the computed values of the heading deviation, 
ljl, from the prescribed course required to maintain static 
equilibrium, as a function of the posi­ tion of the destroyer on 
a wave profile with L,,, = 2L, if the destroyer were attempting 
to maintain a course angle,µ= 15 deg, to the wave direction 
(see Fig. 90). Fig. 92 shows that the required heading 
deviation is greater when the ship has its bow in a trough than 
when its bow is in a crest.
  Whether the static equilibrium orientations corre­ sponding to 
Fig. 92 are stable or unstable with controls fixed was also 
studied by Wahab and Swaan (1964) with the results shown in 
Fig. 93. These results confirm the observation made earlier in 
this section that the positions of a ship with its bow in the trough 
are unstable whereas the positions of the ship with its bow in the 
crest may be stable. The equations also  show that no matter 
how much controls-fixed stability a ship may have in smooth 
water, it becomes unstable in long


w	STABLE
C
I
t'51---v,.Y.,,",4.«.A -"¥,-',,&.,"r-7<,l--f-----+	i
::t


waves (Lwl L >  1.5) at  position a/L,,, =  0.25,  where a is 
the distance of ship's CG ahead of  a  wave crest, as shown in 
Fig. 90. However, ships that are unstable in smooth water 
may become stable in long waves when their bows are near 
the wave crest.
From their stability analysis of the destroyer poised


0.2


0.4	06
G/L.-


0.8	I.O


on a wave with 
automatic controls 
working, Wahab and 
Swaan (1964) conclude 
the following:


Fig. 93 Positions along wave where destroyer of Fig. 92 is stable and 
unstable with controls fixed (from Wahab and Swaan, 1964)
  

(a)	Even with controls working, there is a great danger of 
broaching (turning broadside to the waves)


278	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



for all ships when their bows are in the tro_ugh of 3:n 
astern wave  whose  length  is l.5L or more 1f the ship 
is traveling at about the same_spe d as the ve..
  (b)	The likelihood of broachmg 1 the _cond1t1on Just 
described increases as the wave height mcreases.
  (c)	A reduction in the danger of broaching can be 
achieved by an increase in fin area aft improving the 
smooth-water controls-fixed stability.
  (d)	An autopilot with a large c ntrol co?stan ,.k1 
(Equation 96), can reduce the regions of mstab1hty 
shown on Fig. 93 for the controls-fixed case.
(e)	The introduction of a sensitivity to lf, (Equation












0.3

0.2

Re  u,'   0.1



-0.1

-0.2





















0.7



MODEL 60 82
hwl :1/15, l.p/l. :7/12
,. STEERED
+"e•O
llle=O


DIRECTIONALLY
STABLE


96) does not reduce the regions of in tability signifi­ 
cantly, and an increas in the time lag t in t e con!-1:ols 
does not significantly mcrease the region of mstab1hty. 
Results are presented here of a study made of ship 
motions in waves, on the basis of hydrodynamic data 
obtained in rotating-arm tests as reported by Wahab
and Swaan (1964) and Eda (1972).
  Ship translational motions in the horizontal plane 
(yaw, sway, and surge) do not have a natural fr ­ 
quency, except possibly a very low frequency associ­ 
ated with ship autopilot response. Therefore, the 
effects of encounter frequency on these motions are 
entirely different from those on pitch, heave, and roll, 
which do have natural frequencies.
  Computed results obtained at 15 degrees an? 30 
degrees in following seas are shown on the basis of 
speed and encounter frequency in Fig. 94. In this case, 
with L = L and when the encounter frequency is 
relatively higb (Ct>,' = Ct>.LI V > 2), the difference
between the oscillatory motions of steered and un­ 
steered ships is insignificant, regardless of rudder mo­ 
tions. This is due to a very small ratio of  rudder force 
to wave excitation, and to the ship's inertia.
When the encounter frequency is relatively low (Ct>.'
< 2), the yaw motion of the unsteered ship becomes 
extremely large in this region of frequency, rudder 
effectiveness is greatly increased, and  the  advantage 
of steering is clearly indicated.


MODEL   60   82
1/1•2, w •'l'e •O
hwl ,   1/50

o=b'= IUNSTEEREO) 
0 2


Fig. 96 Effect of rudder size in following sea (Eda, 1972)


  The research also showed that when 
wavelength decreases to less than one 
ship length, yaw response decreases 
significantly. At an encounter angle of 30 
degrees, yaw amplitude becomes almost 
zero when the wavelength is half the ship 
length.
  When the encounter frequency is 
relatively low, the effect on ship stability 
is greatly improved by intro­ duction of 
the control system. Fig. 95 shows that the 
degree of instability decreases with an 
increase i_n gain constants (yaw-gain 
constant = ki, yaw-rate gam con­
stant  = k2)  in the control system.
  It was found that the choice of time 
constant, yaw gain constant, and yaw-rate 
gain constant for 60-de­ gree quartering 
seas  (where  the encounter  frequency is 
relatively high) had little effect on the 
control sys­ tem, regardless of size of gain 
constant. Use of rela­ tively large time 
constants can h lp to prevent  he violent 
rudder activity often experienced m 
followmg seas.	. .
  There was a great increase in I'll;dd r 
otion with increased yaw-rate gain 
constant, md1cat ng the :id­ vantage of 
small values of the constant m reducmg
rudder activity in waves, Section 11. ..	.
  It is known that increasing rudder size 
1s an effective way of achieving both 
greater sta ility and bett r turn­ ing 
ability. The effect of rudder size was 
exammed by varying rudder-force rate 
(Y'6). Rudder-force ates for 
computations were varied as 0.7, 1.0, and 
1.3 times the standard rudder-force rate. 
For a ship running in fol­ lowing seas at 
the same speed as t e  aves t e  effect of 
rudder size is shown in Fig. 96. 
S1gn1ficant improve­ ment is indicated 
with increasing rudder-force rate, which 
is proportional to rudder area.
If, however, the encounter frequency 
is relatively





Re u,'


0.5


o= b'=  
,·	}1srEEREDI
o
=
b
 
=
0
.
4

 


h
i
g
h
,
 
a
s
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
s
e
 
o
f
 
r
u
n
n
i
n
g
_
 
a
t
 
l
o
w
 
s
p
e
e
d
,
 
(
f
o
r
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
,
 
F
r
 
<
 
0
.
3
0
)
 
i
n
 
a
 
q
u
a
r
t
e
r
m
g
 
s
e
a
,
 
t
h
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
s
i
z
e
 
i
s
 
v
e
r
y
 
i
n
s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
 
f
o
r
 
b
o
t
h
 
s
t
e
e
r
e
d
 
a
n
d


o Lo-_s  



-0.5


......:_ 
_==_=_==-
.:;:;=\=.. 	:::'.--:_----o+.7::.5 _

\
_
 
o
=
b
'
:
O
.
&
I
S
T
E
E
R
E
D
I


u
n
s
t
e
e
r
e
d
 
s
h
i
p
s
 
a
t
 
h
i
g
h
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
c
y
,
 
t
h
a
t
 
i
s
,
 
a
t
 
l
o
w
 
s
p
e
e
d
s
 
i
n
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
i
n
g
 
s
 
a
s
.
 
T
h
i
s
 
r
e
 
u
l
t
 
i
s
 
c
o
n
f
i
r
m
e
d
 
b
y
 
s
o
l
u
t
i
o
n
s
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
e
q
u
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
o
f
 
m
o
t
i
o
n
.
  O
a
k
l
e
y
,
 
e
t
 
a
l
 
(
1
9
7
4
)
 
r
e
p
o
r
t
 
o
n
 
e
x
t
e
n
s
i
v
e
 
:
n
o
d
e
l
 
t
e
s
 
s
 
i
n
 
a
s
t
e
r
n
 
s
e
a
s
 
a
n
d
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
a
 
t
i
m
e
 
d
o
m
a
m


Fig. 95 Effect of control system on stability (Eda, 1972)


numerical simulation program for motions 
and capsiz-


CONTROLLABILITY	279


ing (Section 5 of Chapter VIII discusses their work degree-of-freedom situation  in  waves  and  wind  (in- 
further). Perez and Perez (1974) and others have fo- eluding  wave-induced  motions)  have  been  developed 
cused on the problem of maneuvering in waves, and (see McCreight, 1985), (Hooft, 1987), and (Ankudinov 
general time domain models addressing the total six- and Jakobsen, 1987).


Section 13
Vessel Waterway	Interactions
  13.1	General.    Successful operation of a  ship in re-		water depth to ship draft is three or less. At greater 
stricted  waterways   depends  on the  ship, its pilot, the		ratios, shallow-water effects on maneuvering perform- 
local  environment,  and  informational  factors as indi-		ance beomce rapidly less significant as the water deep- 
cated  in Fig. 97.		ens. Restricted waters may be  defined as  narrow 
Direct  analysis  of  navigation  in a restricted  water-	channels or canals, waterways with vertical or over- way 
is very complex. Decisions on maneuvering safely		hanging banks, or areas that  include piers and break- in  
waterways   have  been   mainly  based   on rules  of		waters	which   introduce   a   substantial	change in 
thumb,   comparisons   with   successful   practice,  and		maneuvering	characteristics	or  requirements.	Ob-
"seaman's eye." However, the problems  of control of  viously, most restricted  waters  include shallow water, 
ships in confined waters, particularly in narrow water- and many include significant current  and tide.  In  re-  
ways, have been receiving a great deal of attention in stricted waters,  areas  available for navigation are  nat- 
recent years. Among the reasons for this heightened urally  limited, thus  further  complicating the problems 
interest are the ever increasing size of ships-notably of maneuvering and control of the ship.
tankers   and bulk carriers-the	consequences of acci-		When a ship is proceeding in very shallow or re- 
dents involving hazardous  cargoes, and the social costs	stricted waters, its dynamic behavior is much different 
of  personal  injury  and  property   damage. In confined	from that of the same ship proceeding in wide stretches 
waters,   potential  hazards  of  collision and grounding	of deep water, because of changes in magnitude of the 
attain  their  greatest   concentration,  and control errors	hydrodynamic forces and moments acting on it. Hy- 
may  result  in  personal  injury  and  costly damages  to	drodynamic effects on control can be grouped in the 
both  the  ship  and  the  ruin  of  the  environment. The	following general categories:
accidents  can  have far-reaching  effect.	(a)	The effect of water depth relative to ship draft.
  In   regard    to   maneuvering performance,   shallow		(b)	The effect of channel width and topographic 
waters  may  be  defined as  water  in which the ratio of	character relative to ship beam.






























different hulls were carried out in varying depths of 
water at different current velocities, with hulls ori- 
ented at various angles to the axis of flow of the cur- 
rent.
  Data in Yeh (1964) have been reduced to a series of 
curves of side force and yawing moment as a function 
of flow angle and depth-to-draft ratio (Figs. 98  and 
99). These curves provide an  indication of the  effect 
of shallow water on hydrodynamic forces.
  Figs. 100a and 100b show examples of turning tra- 
jectories obtained in computer model simulations for 
various ships with changes in water depth. These fig- 
ures illustrate how significantly the turning trajectory 
can be influenced by water depth.
  Fig. 101 shows results of the 278,000-dwt Esso 
Osaka full-scale trials reported by Crane (1979) and 
carried out under various water-depth conditions. In 
comparing the trajectories obtained in computer sim- 
ulation runs, for example, those shown in Fig. 100with 
those measured in ship trials, shown in Fig. 101,similar 
tendencies in shallow water effect on turning trajec- 
tory can be observed. A substantial increase in turning 
diameter is shown in shallow water (Dw/T = 1.2) as 
opposed to deep water in Fig. 100 and 101.This change 
in maneuvering characteristics is very important from 
the viewpoint of maneuvering safety, because maneu- 
vering ability becomes of critical importance in shallow 
water, as in harbors or other restricted waterways.
  Experimental data on turning rate can be summa- 
rized. Taking angular velocity in deep water as 100 
percent, the shallow water rates are generally:
  (a)	In water depth 2.5 times ship draft, 90 to 95 
percent (that is, roughly 5 to 10 percent increase in


 

turning diameter)
  (b)	In water depth 1.25 times ship draft, 50 to 60 
percent (that is, roughly 60 to 100 percent increase in 
turning diameter)
  Nizerry and Page (1969) report trial data of a 
213,000-dwt tanker that indicates approximately a 30- 
percent  increase  of  transfer  and  turning  diameter  at 
a water depth 1.5 to 1.75 times ship draft. This result 
correlates fairly well with the above mentioned free 
running model test results. A similar  tendency  was 
also indicated in the captive model test reported by 
Fujimo (1968 and  1970) for a Mariner-Class	ship and 
an oil tanker.
  From the Esso Osaka trials, checking and counter- 
turning ability were reduced as water depth decreased 
from deep to an intermediate depth (50 percent of draft 
as bottom clearance) and then increased at the shal- 
lower depth (20 percent of draft under keel). This 
phenomenon is related to an apparent reversal in con- 
trols-fixed course stability as shown in Fig. 102,where 
stability first decreases but then increases as water 
depth becomes very shallow.
  Stopping distance in the Esso Osaka trials was 
largely independent of water depth, Fig. 103. Heading 
deviation in stopping increased from 18 to 50 and then 
to 88 degrees in going from  deep to medium and then 
to shallow water. Inoue, et al (1980) have also shown 
that stopping distance and lateral deviations become 
smaller and larger respectively with an decrease in 
water depth.
  It should be recognized that a keel clearance of 20 
percent of draft (as in the trials of the Esso Osaka) 
while difficult to test is not very shallow. Ships often


282	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 
Fig. 102 Smooth spiral test results, showing dimensionless turning rate versus 
rudder angle, from 7 knots


(1987) report on the extension of a deep water model 
to predict motions in shallow water with particular 
attention to the shallow water effects on rudder effec­ 
tiveness. A simple approach by Hirano and Takashina 
(1987) proposes estimating the linear derivatives in 
shallow water through use of an "effective ship aspect 
ratio," Ke.


Dw = depth of water
X = an empirical parameter to be evaluated
Based on experimental results with a VLCC, a 
LNG carrier, and a passenger car carrier the 
followng val­ ues for X are proposed, Fig. 104:
X = 2.3 for Y
X = 1.7 for N;
61 = 0.7 for both Y and N
  13.3	Effects of Narrow Channels. When a 
ship moves through water that is unrestricted 
in depth and in width, the lines of flow go not 
only around the sides of the ship but also along 
the bottom of the ship. If the water is shallow, 
the flow under the hull is re­ stricted, causing 
greater flow along the sides. This change in 
flow in turn changes the side forces and 
moments acting on the ship and hence the 
hydrody­ namic derivatives of the ship such as 
Y,.. N., and Yr are changed.
  If, in addition to being shallow, the channel 
is also restricted in width, as in a canal, the 
hydrodynamic derivatives are even more 
severely altered than they are in shallow water 
of unrestricted width. If a ship, symmetrical 
about its xz-plane, is restricted in its mo­ tions 
so that its x-axis and its velocity vector, V, are





where


k
ke=	T	( 'TT T	'TT T
2
D
w
k  
+
 
2
D
w
 
c
o
t	X


(116)


e
x
a
c
t
l
y
 
c
o
l
l
i
n
e
a
r
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
c
e
n
t
e
r
l
i
n
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
n
a
l
,
 
a
n
d
 
i
f
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
n
a
l
 
c
r
o
s
s
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
 
i
s
 
c
o
n
s
t
a
n
t
 
a
n
d
 
s
y
m
m
e
t
r
i
c
a
l
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
i
t
s
 
v
e
r
t
i
c
a
l
 
c
e
n
t
e
r
l
i
n
e
 
p
l
a
n
e
,
 
t
h
e
n
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
i
s
 
f
l
o
w
 
s
y
m
m
e
t
r
y
 
p
o
r
t
 
a
n
d
 
s
t
a
r
b
o
a
r
d
 
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
i
p
 
i
s
 
s
u
b
j
e
c
t
e
d
 
t
o
 
n
o
 
y
a
w
 
m
o
m
e
n
t
 
o
r
 
s
i
d
e
 
f
o
r
c
e
.
 
I
f
,
 
h
o
w
e
v
e
r
,
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
m
e


k = is effective aspect ratio in deep water
T = mean draft/mean length ship's draft

ESSO  OSAKA,   278  k OWT



Fig. 103 Rudder angle effect on stopping in shallow water and deep water 
from 3.8 knots, with 45 rpm astern


ship is moving along the same canal with its x-
axis parallel to the centerline of the canal but 
displaced a horizontal distance y0 from the canal 
centerline,  the flow symmetry is disturbed as 
shown in Fig. 105. The increase in the velocity 
of flow between  the hull and the near wall 
coupled with the decreased velocity of flow 
between the hull and the far wall creates a force 
that draws the ship toward the near wall and, as 
shown both by full-scale experience and by 
model experi­ ments, at the same time sets up a 
moment tending to swing the bow toward the far 
wall; that is, the deriv­ ative Yy0 is always 
positive and the derivative Ny0 is negative 
according to the sign convention of this chap­ 
ter. The magnitude of the derivatives Yy0 and Ny0 
in­ creases as the canal width decreases.
  The derivatives Yy0 and Ny0 imply the 
existence in canals of a sensitivity to position 
which does not exist in the open ocean. 
Operation in canals also leads to a heading 
sensitivity which does not exist in the open 
ocean. According to the flow diagram shown in 
Fig. 106, the existence of an angle iJ, will create 
a moment N that tends  to increase iJ,; that is, 
the derivative  N,i, is always positive. Term N,i,, 
like Yyu, is therefore a destabilizing derivative. 
Important to note  is  that  if the path of the ship 
is restricted to  being  parallel  to the centerline 
of the canal, it is impossible to make a 
distinction between N13 and N,i, and Y13 and Y,i, 
because


CONTROLLABILITY	283
y'
V
-2.8




-1.8



0.0 		Fig. 105	Flow diogrom in conal with ship and its velocity vector parrallel
Ke	to canal wall (Abkowitz, 1964)


NS
-0.6


-0.4



V   = Yo -	U1lJI;   v'  =  y -  
lJl	(117)
V =  Yo  -	U1 lJl V•   I     = • Y•   oI      -    
ii,'


-0.2		and following Equation (11), the equations of motion 
of a ship in restricted water are as follows:
0.0	0.2	0.1	Ke	0.6	y oY + Y y + (Y';, - a') y + (Y - Y )l/1
y'	+ (Y,b -	Y';,) ti,' + Y'i/t.	= O
r



0.2	0 TANKER
t;. LNGC
□ PCC	N oY + N y + N';, y + (N,p - Nv)lJI
CONTAINER


(118)


0.1	+ (N   -   N )i/1' + (N' i/i  -    /'J •  = 0
 	 Since  both equations  are  of  second order in both  Yo
0.0	and  lJI, their simultaneous  solution  leads  to a fourth-
0.0	0.1	0.2	0.3	order  differential  equation.  In  view  of  the  nature of
Ke		Yy0, Ny0, and N,p as discussed earlier, no ship can pos- 
sess controls-fixed  positional  stability  with  respect to
r	the centerline  of  the  canal and any ship operating   on
-0.10	0    TANKER	the canal  centerline  is in a  position  of  unstable equi-
t.   LNGC	librium. The only way of holding a ship's path on the
□ PCC	0		canal centerline is by use of  controls, either manual
◇	CONTAINER	or automatic. If  automatic controls are  employed, a
-0.05		continuous signal measuring the distance from each 
bank must be provided and Equation (96) has to in- 
elude an additional term that is sensitive to the dis-
0.00	tance, y0•
0.0	0.1	0.2	0.3	Extensive  model testing  has  been  conducted  at the
Ke	David  Taylor  Research  Center  to  evaluate narrow
Fig. 104	Linear derivatives in shallow water as functions of effective aspect
ratio




in this case /3 = 1/J. However, in the general case, the 
path of the ship is not parallel to the centerline of the 
canal. For example, if the ship is steering across the 
canal as in Fig. 106, /3 may be zero while 1/J is not zero. 
In this case, forces and moments may exist that cor­ 
respond to Ywlfi, Y y0  ,   Nwl/J, and Ny0Yo. On the other hand, 
Yn/3 and Nn/3 can only be zero since /3 is zero.
Noting that for small motions;

 


01/J'.«a:4½(//// =w'.'{i[fit'««acc«Lu:

Fig. l 06 Flow diagram in canal with ship and its velocity vector at angle
l/J to  canal wall


284	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




30
                               W/B 3.05
20


10





TANKER		 CARGO 
SHIP------






-0.10	-0.05	0.10

-10


0.15 Y0 8 / L




-20

-30






fig. 107 Required rudder angle to maintain off-centerline course





,	40
',	6R (deQ)




TANKER
Dw/T     =  1.2


,.....


....



........


30
''	20
10






ALLOW
ABLE 
RUDDE
R 
ANGLE 
(15 
DEG)




-2.0	-1.0	1.0	2.0

-10


ALLOWABLE RUDDER ANGLE 
(15 DEG)




-20


-30


-40


................
,	W/B=6.11	,..._




Fig. 108 Required rudder angle to maintain off-centerline course


CONTROLLABILITY	285



channel effect, much of it in connection with Panama 
Canal improvements (Garthane, 1946). A useful rean- 
alysis of basic results was made by Schoenherr (1960). 
The original tests  were  for  distance  ratios  (distance 
to channel centerline divided by ship beam) ranging 
from about 0.23 to 2.6, while the ratios of channel depth 
to ship draft ranged from about 1.40 to 2.49. Schoen- 
herr has faired the data, generalized, and prepared 
design charts covering forces and yawing  moments 
over a wide range.
  Moody (1964) presented the results of a series of 
model tests on the handling of deeply laden ships in a 
widened and asymmetrically deepened section of Gail- 
lard Cut in the Panama Canal. His data show that 
widening and deepening the channel greatly  reduced 
the interaction forces over the greater part of the 
channel width, and that this  effect was  accompanied 
by a marked improvement in dynamic course stability 
of very large ships. Also concluded from this investi- 
gation is that the asymmetrical shape of the  channel 
and the abrupt change  in depth  between  the  old cut 
on one side and the new cut on the other did not have 
any untoward effect on ship performance.
  Moody's report (1964) is of interest to ship designers 
because it presents forces and moments  as  functions 
of lateral position and yaw angle together with obser- 
vations on control of the model.
  A series of analytical and experimental studies of 
ship control problems in canals was conducted by Eda 
(1971, 1973) under the Interoceanic Canal Study proj- 
ect. A nonlinear mathematical model formulated on a 
digital computer was used to examine the dynamic 
behavior of two ships, namely, a large tanker of 
250,000 dwt, 335 m (1085-ft) length, CB 0.83, and a 
cargo ship 188 m (600 ft) length, CB 0.60. Available





hydrodynamic results of captive model tests were em- 
ployed in order to establish realistic dynamic models. 
Figs. 107 and 108 show results in the form of esti- 
mated required rudder angles to maintain off-center- 
line course under equilibrium conditions with changes 
in water depth and channel width relative to ship di- 
mensions. The abscissas show the ratio of distance off-
centerline to ship length. In all cases, equilibrium drift 
angle was relatively small.
  Figs. 109 and 110 show calculated heading changes 
of the cargo ship and tanker  after  a yaw  disturbance 
of 2 degrees from the initial centerline course. Both 
ships were run at the same speed at 6 knots in a canal 
158 m (520 ft) wide with a depth of 24 m (78 ft).




 


286	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 


  The oscillatory divergent motions shown in Fig. 109 
indicate that both ships are directionally unstable and 
that the degree of instability is greater for the tanker 
than for the cargo ship when the rudder is fixed (gain 
constants Kl and K2 = 0). When yaw gain Kl = 4 and 
yaw-rate gain K2 = 0, for example, a rudder of 4 de- 
grees is ordered at the heading angle deviation of one 
degree. Fig. 110 shows the motions with activated rud- 
der (gain constants Kl and K2 = 4). It will be seen that 
both ships are now directionally stable. As shown in 
these figures, the dynamic behavior  of the cargo  ship 
is much better than that of the tanker,  mainly because 
of its much smaller size relative to the specified canal 
dimensions.
  The dynamic simulations were continued for the 
ships in canals, with variations in canal dimensions and 
rudder control gain constants. Based on these results, 
the contours of neutral stability for various canal di- 
mensions were obtained. Fig. 111 provides the devel- 
oped guide to acceptable ship control parameters 
relative to ship size and canal dimensions on the basis 
of the following assumed study criteria (although the 
solution is certainly not a complete solution nor a uni- 
versally applicable one):
  (a)	Equilibrium rudder angle of 15 and 20 degrees 
at 5 percent and 10 percent ship lengths off-centerline.
(b)	Neutral stability with Kl = K2 = 2, and 4.
  (c)	30 cm (l-ft) and 60 cm (2-ft) bottom clearance 
to allow for squat at limiting ship speed of 6 knots in 
full scale for the cargo ship and the tanker, respec- 
tively.
  The acceptable performance region of canal dimen- 
sions lies above and to the right of the contours in Fig. 
111.
  The importance of the operator-ship-steering system 
has been recognized by many investigators. For ex-


ample, Brard (1950) said, "The difficulty of keeping 
the model off a solid boundary is the basic criterion as 
to its canal-transiting qualities. Naturally this whole 
operation depends on the operator."
  In   an   extension   of  Brard's	investigations, 
De- Verdiere and Audren (1951) offered the following 
two qualitative design observations which were 
derived from experimental tests with models steered 
by a hu- man helmsman in a simulated canal: 1. Ship 
forms that are full at the bow and sharp at the stern are 
more favorable to good handling qualities in a canal, 
and 2. Maneuvering qualities of a vessel with two 
propellers are improved when the rudder is placed 
abaft of the propellers. "
  Similar trends for ships with one propeller were 
noted earlier by Baker (1924) who observed that rud- 
ders that deflect into the propeller race are more ef- 
fective in maneuvering, whether in a canal or in open 
water.
  River towboat pilots indicate an interesting 
approach to control. In some instances, they  go 
through  bends in a river by ordering rate of turn on 
the  autopilot rather than ordering rudder angle. Such 
boats are equipped with gyrocompass rate-of-swing 
indicators, and this mode of control is apparently 
useful in fa- miliar locations with variable tows.
  Bindel (1960) presents test results for three tanker 
models in canals. Two of the models had a single 
screw and single rudder, and the third  had twin 
screws  and  a single rudder. Different canal 
configurations were used during these tests; bed width 
and water depth were varied while bank  slopes were 
kept  constant  at  a slope of 1:3. It was found that for 
a given ship and canal there may exist a  critical speed 
from  the  point of view of ship maneuverability, that 
is, the speed that causes the greatest difficulty in 
passing through the canal. The intensity of the 
difficulty depends on both





CONTROLLABILITY	287

the ship and the canal. For three different tankers Fig. 
112 indicates bands of critical speeds in knots plotted 
against the ratio of the cross-sectional area of the canal 
to the midship section area of the ship. The  graph 
shows that the higher this ratio, the higher the critical 
speed. Above and below the critical speed band, ma­ 
neuverability of the single-screw models was satisfac­ 
tory. The performance of the twin-screw model, which 
was poorer, can be ascribed to a difference in rudder 
effectiveness, for the single centerline rudder was not 
located in the propeller race.
  Norrbin (1971) provides observations on a model for 
deep and confined waters, and Fujino (1976) offers a 
state-of-the-art survey of maneuverability in restricted 
waters with concentration on course stability.
  If the handling qualities of a ship are  so poor that 
it is impossible to negotiate restricted waterways, 
Moody (1964) suggests that a practical solution is to 
attach a tugboat to the stern of the ship by towline. 
With the tugboat holding back on the stern, the ship's 
propeller slipstream velocity is increased, thus im­ 
proving rudder effectiveness. Furthermore, the towline 
tension at the stern of the ship improves the stability 
of the ship, thus reducing the rudder action needed to 
maintain a straight course.
13.4	Interaction Between Two Vessels. Just as the


passage of a ship near a channel boundary causes  
forces and moments to act on the ship that do not exist 
in unrestricted waters, so too does passage by another 
ship close aboard. The principal difference in discussing 
the two cases is that the channel boundary may be 
assumed to be long relative to the ship length and of 
constant cross-sectional shape; hence the interaction 
forces and moments in a channel may be assumed to
depend only on the transverse distance, Yo, and the 
ship's yaw angle, \fl. In the case of one ship passing 
close to another, the interaction forces are functions 
also of the longitudinal distance, x0, separating the two 
ships as well as the lateral distance Yo and the yaw 
angles, plus the relative sizes of the ships.
  Close passage of two ships and the resulting hydro­ 
dynamic interactions between the two are operation­ 
ally important for situations such as overtaking or 
meeting in a restricted channel, maneuvering to avoid 
collision, passing a ship moored adjacent to a narrow 
channel, and conducting underway replenishment at 
sea (UNREP).
  Some of the investigations of ship-to-ship interac­ 
tions, including cases of overtaking, meeting (ships 
moving in opposite directions head on or nearly so), 
and a ship passing a stopped (or moored) ship are 
discussed in this Section.
  Figs. 113 and 114 summarize the most significant 
results reported by Newton (1960). To obtain the data 
shown on the upper part of Fig. 113, two models were 
towed without propellers and with /3 = 6n = 0 on 
parallel straight courses at different longitudinal po­ 
sitions relative to each other over a range of full-scale


(50- FT SEPARATION, BEAM TO BEAM I

111 20




g	00	00
!;	LONGITUDINAL SEPARATION IN METERS
0	A  ASTERN OF B.	A AHEAD OF B.
Fig. 113 Measured interaction forces and moments land correcting rudder 
angles) between two ships on parallel courses as larger ship overtakes the 
smaller (Fig 2, Newton, 1960)




speeds from 10 to 20 knots, and the Y-force and N­ 
moment acting on each model in each position was 
measured. The longitudinal separation scale shown as 
the abscissa on Fig. 113 fa measured between the 
mid­ length of the two ships. The rudder  angle  data 
shown in the lower part of the figure were obtained by 
com­ puting the values of 61 and /31 needed to 
maintain equi­ librium at each of the relative positions 
shown. The following assumptions, partly validated by 
free-run­ ning, piloted model tests, were made in 
computing 61 and /31 :
  (a)	That the system could be treated as one of
steady motion.
  (b)	That interaction forces and moments are unaf­ 
fected by the action of the propeller or by the small 
values of /3 and 6n needed to maintain equilibrium.
  The magnitudes of the maximum forces of 
attraction shown on Fig. 113 are of interest. At a 
speed of 10


 


15.5 m (59-ft) beam-to-beam separation, and these oc- 
cur when the two ships are very close to the fully 
abeam position 4. These forces  would be  quadrupled 
at a speed of 20 knots, and according to Fig. 114 would 
be decreased by about 40 per cent if the beam-to-beam 
separation were increased to 30 m (100 ft.)
  It is evident from Fig. 113 that there are positions 
when both the interaction force and the interaction 
moment tend to draw one ship toward the other. Such 
positions are 3 for ship A and 5 for ship B. Fig. 113 
shows that, in these positions, the rudder deflection 
angles are such that the rudder moments oppose the 
interaction moments. However, with these deflection 
angles, the rudder force tends to add to the force of 
attraction. Therefore, in these positions it is necessary 
to deflect the rudder sufficiently so that not only is the 
interaction moment overcome, but also a yaw angle,
{3,is introduced that creates an outboard force that 
counteracts both the attraction force and the rudder 
force. By this means, the two ships should be able to 
avoid collision in positions 3 and 5 provided that the 
transverse separation between the two ships is not so 
small that the available rudder  force  cannot  correct 
the inward swing caused by the interaction moment.
  It should be noted that position 3 immediately pre- 
cedes and position 5 immediately follows the directly 
abeam position when the two ships have to apply op- 
posite rudder to keep on parallel  straight  courses. 
Thus, in the short space of time between positions 3  
and 4 for ship A and between positions 4  and  5 for 
ship B, the rudder has to swing from a large port 
deflection to a starboard deflection. Obviously, the pre-


 


cise timing when this has to be done is not easy to 
choose. It is therefore true that two passing  ships  
suffer the greatest  risk  of collision in positions 3 and 
5, which would be augmented if the seas were rough 
and a heavy wind were blowing. Corrective action, if 
collision seemed imminent in position 3, would be for 
ship A to reduce speed  and  ship B to increase  speed. 
If collision were imminent in position 5, Sh~pB should 
decrease speed and ship A increase speed.
  A number of theoretical methods (Tuck, 1974,Wang, 
discussion of Tuck, Dand, 1974, and Abkowitz et aI, 
1970) for predicting interaction forces and moments 
have been developed and are in reasonable agreement 
with available model test data. Fig. 115 presents typ- 
ical results for two ships moving at equal speed on 
parallel courses. Figs. 113, 114, and 115 illustrate the 
effect of parameters such as longitudinal and lateral 
separation and water depth on interaction forces and 
moments. Fig. 116 illustrates the variation of maxi- 
mum sway force with lateral separation and relative 
ship length, L2 / L, for the case of a ship passing a 
stopped or moored ship (Wang, 1979).
  Applications of theoretical methods and results have 
included simulation of UNREP operations, (Abkowitz, 
Ashe, and Fortson, 1970) and potential collision scen- 
arios, (Dand, 1974). Kaplan and Sankaranarayanan 
(1987) reported an efficient numerical method for pre- 
dicting lateral forces and yaw moments on ships on a 
parallel course at different speeds, operating at a given 
lateral and longitudinal separation distance in a shal- 
low asymmetric canal. Kijima (1987) also described an 
approach for handling ship to ship interactions in a 
channel. Norrbin (1974) reports on tests of bank effects 
on a ship moving through a  short  dredged  channel, 
and later (1985) on a tanker moving near  a  vertical 
wall and near a bank that has varying slope.


290	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

D  H	where
F is vertical force, positive downward
S0 cross-sectional area of the canal
S(x) is local cross-sectional area of the ship
B(x) is local beam of ship
p is mass density of canal water
  Tuck's theory predicts the points on the curve shown 
in Fig. 118 for ships moving along the centerline of a 
channel that has vertical walls. Since the calculated 
points cover wide ranges of practical ship forms and 
ship speeds, the curves may be considered as the uni­ 
versal curves of sinkage and trim. In the figure, Wis 
the effective width of the canal relative to ship length,
that is W = (WI L) yl	- Fn 2 The figure shows that



Fig. 120	Limiting speeds in canals based on squat


   13.5	Sinkage and Trim. Tuck (1966 and 1967) pre­ 
sented results obtained from theoretical studies on the 
problem of sinkage and trim of ships in shallow and 
restricted waters. His calculations imply a nearly uni­ 
versal nondimensional curve for sinkage and trim  
which is almost independent of ship form. Sinkage is 
defined here as the downward vertical displacement of 
ship's center of gravity, and positive trim as the  bow­ 
up angle of rotation of the ship at its center of gravity. 
Squat is the resultant  movement  due to sinkage  and 
to bow-up rotation. In many cases, trim can be negative 
(that is, bow down) owing to low-speed operation in 
shallow water.
  As examples of computation of sinkage and trim, 
Tuck (1967) shows, as in Fig. 117, curves of sinkage 
against Froude number Fn  for  ratios  of  canal  width 
to ship length (WI L) of infinity, 3.4, 1.0, and 0.5. 
Froude number here is based on water depth, Fn =  
UIv gDw. The ship form used is a Taylor Standard 
Series with a  prismatic coefficient  of  0.64. The  value
3.4 for WI L corresponds to the dimensions of the 
towing tank in which the measurements of Graff (1964) 
were performed. Clearly, at W / L = 3.4 and for mod­ 
erate values of Fn, the departure from the result for 
infinite width is small, but it is already about 10 percent 
at Fn = 0.8, even for such a wide channel. Also shown 
by the broken line are the results of the hydraulic 
approximation at W / L = 0.5 which give a slightly 
underestimated amount of sinkage compared to  re­ 
sults  predicted  by  the  theory.  The following formula
may be used to obtain the approximate value of vertical 
hydraulic force acting on the ship proceeding in a rel­ 
atively narrow canal:


the effect of finite narrow width is much greater for
sinkage than it is for trim.
  Fig. 119 shows the comparison between Tuck's com­ 
puted sinkage and trim and the experimental result.s 
reported by Graff et al (1964) for a value of Dwl L =
0.125 with sidewalls at infinity. The agreement is good 
for values of Fn < 0.7, but the comparison deteriorates 
as  Fn  approaches  1,  that  is,  as   the  ship  speed  ap­
proaches the critical speed of  U = v gDw. (This critical
speed, the reader will notice, closely approximates 
the celerity of waves in water that is shallow in 
comparison to wave length). Lea and Feldman (1972) 
extended the theory for the case Fn a1: 1. This figure 
also shows that sinkage is the dominant 
phenomenon at subcritical speeds (Fn < 1), whereas 
trim is dominant at super­ critical speeds (Fn > 1). 
The figure also shows that the large subcritical 
sinkage is always positive (that is, downward), 
whereas the super-critical trim is like­ wise positive 
(that is, bow up).
  Sufficient bottom clearance is one of the crucial re­ 
quirements for ship operation in a canal. Fig.  120 
shows contours presented by Eda (1971) of speed as 
limited in canals of various size to enable the ship to 
clear the bottom of the canal. These curves were ob­ 
tained by using the following semiempirical equation, 
which is based on model test results (Yamaguchi, 
1967, 1968):


where
FnL = limiting Froude number, UI.JgI;
p = draft/ship length, h/L


pU2	r
F  = So(l  _ Fn  2)      S(x)B(x)dx



(119)


q = 1/(1 + e), where e = 0.24 from 
test results
m = water depth/ship draft, DwlT


CONTROLLABILITY	291
            Section 14 
Hydrodynamics of Control Surfaces


  14.1	Geometry, Forces, and Moments. The purpose 
in having a control surface on a ship is to control the 
motion of the ship. The control surface may be com­ 
posed entirely of a single movable surface or of a 
combination of fixed and movable portions. It may typ­ 
ically be a rudder used to control the horizontal motion 
of a ship, a diving plane to control the vertical motion 
of a submarine, or an activated fin to reduce the rolling 
motion of a ship. A control surface has one sole func­ 
tion to perform in meeting its purpose, and that is to 
develop a control force in consequence of its orienta­ 
tion and movement relative to the water. The control 
force exerted by a rudder, for example, at the stern of  
a  ship creates  a  moment,  N36R  , on the ship  which 
causes the ship to rotate and to orient itself at an angle 
of attack to the flow. The forces and moments gen­ 
erated as a result of this rotation and angle of attack 
then determine the maneuvering characteristics of the 
ship.
  The simplest and most common type of control sur­ 
face is the all-movable surface as diagramed in Fig. 
121; other types are described in Section 14.7. The 
dimensions of a typical all-movable control surface are 
expressed as lying in three mutually orthogonal di­ 
rections as indicated in Fig. 121: chord dimensions par­ 
allel to the direction of motion, span dimensions normal 
to the direction of motion, and thickness -dimensions 
normal to both the span and the chord. Since most 
control surfaces are neither rectangular in shape nor 
of uniform thickness, each of these dimensions may 
have several values. Following aeronautical nomencla­ 
ture, the edge of a control surface adjacent to the hull 
to which it is attached is referred to as the root and 
the opposite edge as the tip. Hence, there is a root 
chord, c,., and a tip chord, ct, and their average is the 
mean chord, (for straight-edged surfaces). There are 
similarly defined thickness dimensions as shown in Fig.
121. The mean span,  bis  the average of the spans of
the leading and the trailing edges of the rudder. The 
ratio blc is the geometric aspect ratio, the ratio tic is 
the thickness chord ratio, and the ratio ct I Cr is the 
taper  ratio.  The  profile  area,  Ar1  may  be  taken  as 
7j x and a is the sweepback angle of  the  quarter­ 
chord line.
  In contrast to an airplane wing, a control surface 
must usually be capable of developing lift in either of 
two opposed directions. Hence, the section shape 
shown is symmetrical about the centerplane of the 
control surface.
  For the sake of simplicity, this section will treat the 
rudder principally, although most of the discussion will 
apply with equal validity to any control surface. The 
additional complicating effects of propellers on the flow 
over control surfaces are addressed in Section 17.
  

Consider a rudder as a separate body, completely 
immersed in a nonviscous fluid at an angle of 
attack, a, to the uniform flow velocity unaffected by 
ship hull or propeller, Fig. 122. According to the 
two-dimen­ sional (infinite aspect ratio) theory 
developed in Chap­ ter VI, Section 2.5, Vol. II, the 
combination of forward velocity and angle of attack 
will induce a circulation about the rudder which in 
turn produces a lift force on the rudder. Since in the 
steady, two-dimensional, ideal, nonviscous, deeply-
submerged flow considered in this paragraph there is 
no drag force, the total force due to the angle of 
attack will act normal to the di­ rection of the free-
stream velocity.
However, because rudders have a finite aspect ratio,
two-dimensional theory does not accurately predict the 
forces acting on them. When the rudder is at  an angle 
of  attack, vortices are  shed over the root of the rudder 
( unless the hull is close enough to the root to prevent 
the formation of vortices) and over the tip of the rud­ 
der, which induce velocities in the  plane  determined 
by the span and thickness. These velocities when 
added to the stream velocity cause, among other 
effects, an induced-drag force in the direction of 
motion.
In  addition  to the  preceding  two- and three-dimen­
sional effects which can be predicted by frictionless 
flow theory, there exist friction and separation 
forces that arise because water is a viscous fluid. 
While the frictional force acts tangentially to the 
surface of the

"- z
0
en
-1-
X





























ct	TIP THICKNESS, tt
 	u	4	
Fig. 121 Dimensions of a typical all-movable control 
surface


292	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



Xrudder = L sin /3R - D cos /3R


(121c)

















Fig. 122 Rudder force components


rudder, the direction of the force caused by separation 
of the viscous boundary layer cannot be predicted pre­ 
cisely. One effect of viscosity is to prevent the achieve­ 
ment of any positive incremental pressures  at  the tail 
of the control surface, thus introducing a  so-called 
form or eddy drag into the force system acting on the 
control surface.
  The total resultant hydrodynamic force in a real fluid 
arising from the effects described in the preceding 
paragraphs is shown in Fig. 122 as acting at a single 
point called the center of pressure, CP. In contrast to 
the resultant force in ideal, two-dimensional flow which


For the purposes of Equations  (121a-c),  the 
signs of  L, D, and /3R must always be taken 
as positive, whereas xR should be negative if 
the rudder is aft of the origin and positive if it 
is forward. With these assumptions, the sign 
of Yrudder in Equation (121a) will depend on 
the sign of 6R. If 6R is negative, Yrudder is 
negative; if 6R is positive, Yrudder is positive . 
It is for this reason
that the expression for Yrudder is preceded 
by a ± sign. Since  in  Equation  (121c)  D  cos  
/3R   is  always  larger than L sin /3, X is 
always negative;  that  is, directed aft.
  Equations (121) are valid only for  the 
special  case of a rudder that is well isolated 
from the ship to which it is attached. In most 
practical cases, significant in­ teraction takes 
place between the rudder and the ship  so that 
the total Y-force created by rudder deflection 
acting on the combined ship-rudder system, is 
larger than that indicated by the equation and 
its center of action is forward of the center of 
pressure of the rud­ der itself. In fact its 
center of  action  may  not  be on the rudder 
at all.
  For purposes of rudder design, the  
component  of the total rudder force, 
excluding interaction effects, which is normal 
to the center plane of the rudder and 
designated, F, in Fig. 122 is of importance. 
The product of this component times the 
distance of the center of pressure from the 
centerline of the rudder stock yields the 
hydrodynamic torque experienced by the 
stock. Using the nomenclature of Figs. 121 
and 122:


would be normal to the direction of motion, the total 
resultant force in a real fluid is more nearly normal


QH = F(d - CP1:)


(121d)


to the centerplane of the rudder. This force may be 
variously resolved into any number of components. 
Three components of interest in ship control are a lift 
component, L, normal to the direction of motion, a drag 
component, D, parallel to the direction of  motion, and 
a y-component normal to the axis of the ship.  This 
latter component is the reason for having a rudder. If 
there were no interaction between the pressure field 
around the rudder and the adjacent ship and its ap­ 
pendages, this y-component would be the control force, 
Y86R  , introduced in Section 3.5, and the moment of this 
component about the z-axis of the ship would be the 
control moment, N86R  . According to Figs. 122 and 22, 
the y-component of the total  rudder force,  assuming 
no interaction between the ship and the rudder, is:
 Ya 6R = Yrudder = ± (L cos /3R + D sin /3R)	(121a) 
and
Na 6R = Nrudder = (Yrudder) (XR)	(121b)
where /3R is the drift angle at the rudder (see Fig. 22), 
xR is the distance from the origin of  the ship  to  the 
CP of the rudder, and  L  and  D are  the lift  and  drag 
of the rudder. The x-component of the resultant rudder 
force is:


where dis the mean distance between the leading 
edge
of the rudder and the centerline of the rudder  
stock. The sign of moments about the  rudder  
stock  should be determined on the basis of 
whether d is greater or less than (CP). and not 
on the basis of the right-hand rule.
  Similarly, the bending moment on the 
rudder stock about the root section is
(L 2 + D2)½ x (CP).
where s denotes spanwise. The maximum 
anticipated values of these moments are used 
in the design of the rudder stock, the rudder 
bearings, and the steering engine. The rudder 
stock diameter, in turn, determines the root 
thickness of the rudder itself (see Section
17.8).
  To permit ready comparison of rudder 
forces and moments among similar rudders of 
different size and operating at different 
speeds, it is convenient to ex­ press the 
rudder forces and moments in nondimen­ 
sional form as was done in Section 3 for the 
hull forces and moments. The parameters 
used for nondimension­ alization  in this case 
are  p, U, AR and  or b in lieu of p, V, and L. 
The following are the nondimensional forms 
of the most commonly used rudder forces 
and


CONTROLLABILITY	293




 
   14.2	Flow Around a Ship'. Rudder. A rudder on a 
ship performs its function in a highly complicated me- 
dium. Hydrodynamic flow phenomena such as stall, 
cavitation, and aeration exist which place definite limits 
on maximum achievable rudder performance.  These 
are very involved phenomena, which are discussed only 
briefly in this chapter. For a fuller discussion of stall 
and cavitation the reader is referred to Thwaites (1960) 
and Breslin and Landweber (1961).
  Stall is defined as a more or less abrupt discontinuity 
in the lift versus angle-of-attack  curve.  As the  angle 
of attack on a rudder is increased, the point where the 
flow separates on the downstream side of the rudder 
moves forward along the chord of the rudder. As the 
extent of the region of flow separation increases, the 
slope of the lift curve with respect to the angle  of 
attack begins to decrease. Finally, if the angle of at- 
tack is further increased to a certain critical (stall) 
angle, there is an abrupt  discontinuity  in the  growth 
of the lift (or normal force) with angle of attack, and 
the lift begins to decrease with increased angle of 
attack. Typical curves of normal force coefficient ver- 
sus angle of attack,  carried  through  the  stall  point, 
for a rudder in the free stream as well as in the pro- 
peller race are shown in Figure 248.
  Cavitation and aeration are governed by the mag- 
nitude of the reduction of pressure on the downstream 
side of the rudder. Inception of cavitation is critically 
dependent on nuclei in the water and  on roughnesses 
on the rudder surface. As described in Chapter VI, 
cavitation occurs when the sum of the maximum neg- 
ative pressure (below ambient) on the downstream



side of the rudder, plus atmospheric pressure and hy- drostatic 
pressure, is less than the  vapor  pressure  of the fluid. The 
effect of cavitation is shown in Fig. 123. The shaded area I 
shows for a particular section shape the extent of negative 
pressure that would not be achievable because of cavitation at 
any angle of attack of 10 deg at a speed of 20 knots and a depth 
of sub- mergence of 3 m (10 ft). The shaded area II shows 
similar data for an  angle  of attack  of 15 deg, a speed of 15 
knots, and a submergence of 10 ft. It  is  clear from Fig. 123 
that by limiting the growth of the neg- ative-pressure region 
around a rudder, cavitation re- duces the rate of increase of lift 
as the  angle  of attack is increased at any given speed, but 
cavitation alone does not stop the growth  of the  lift  curve  
with angle of attack; it only slows growth. Thus at moderate 
speeds, cavitation is not as restrictive of rudder per- formance 
as stall is. However, Fig. 123 shows that as speed is increased, 
the inhibiting  effect of cavitation  on lift becomes greater. 
Furthermore, at any speed, cavitation can cause erosion of the 
surface of the rud- der. Some authorities have also ascribed a 
serious case of rudder-induced vibration on a ship to cavitation 
around the rudder (Macovsky, Duerr, and  Jewell, 1959).
  As its name implies, aeration (also called ventilation) 
involves the drawing of air from the atmosphere into




 



the suction (downstream) side ofthe rudder. It usually 
occurs when the rudder is at or near  the  surface  of  
the water and when the difference in pressure between 
the atmosphere and the suction side of the rudder 
exceeds the resistance to air drawing from the surface. 
Thus if the resistance to air drawing is low, aeration 
will occur at lesser angles of attack or at lower speeds


than will cavitation. Rudder aeration occurs 
frequently in model turning tests and is 
immediately recognizable at the rudder. In 
some tests the very bottom of a model rudder 
has been seen to be clear of water, that  is, the 
air bubble is carried all the way down the 
suction side of the rudder.	_
The occurrence of stall, cavitation, and aeration is



 


CONTROLLABILITY	295



difficult enough to predict for a rudder in a free stream 
where the velocity and angle of attack are precisely 
known. When the rudder is located under the stern of 
a ship, these fundamental quantities are not known 
with accuracy unless very special instrumentation is 
used, because the ship's hull and appendages ahead 
of the rudder influence both the direction and speed 
of the flow to the rudder. This altered flow is part of 
the interference effect mentioned in Section 14.1. This 
interference effect for a ship in a turn is shown in Fig. 
22 by use of a straightening influence, angle E, which 
tends to increase the angle of attack on the rudder 
beyond that which it would have if there were no in­ 
terference effects. The velocity at the rudder is also 
generally different from the ship's velocity because the 
presence of the ship slows the flow to the rudder; on 
the other hand, if the rudder is located abaft a propeller 
and nearly in line with it, the flow velocity is increased 
by the race of the propeller. Furthermore, since the 
wake field is usually nonuniform at the stern, the rud­ 
der undergoes different magnitudes and directions of 
velocity vector throughout its span. Thus the rudder 
passes through a complicated flow environment at the 
stern of a ship that is similar to that undergone by a 
propeller. In addition, the complicated flow environ­ 
ment at the stern of a model of a ship may be quite 
different from that at the stern of the ship itself.
  14.3	Scale Effects. Each of the phenomena dis­ 
cussed in the previous subsection is governed by dif­ 
ferent laws of similitude. These laws are discussed in 
Chapters V and VI of Vol. II.
  Very important scale effects on rudder performance 
occur with the typical small-scale free running models 
run in compliance with Froude's Law. Neither full­ 
scale Reynolds number nor Weber number (defined 
later in this section) can  be simulated,  and  the effect 
of Reynolds number on  maximum  lift and stall angle 
is serious.
  For actual ships, Reynolds number for the rudder 
is roughly of the order of 107 Since model tests are



(Lofton and Smith, 1949, and Whicker and Fehlner, 
1958).
  Free stream rudder tests, where compliance with 
Froude's Law is not necessary, also indicate qualita­ 
tively that the higher the Reynolds number, the 
greater the angle of attack at which stall occurs. Fig. 
126 shows this relationship for foils of various 
aspect ratio. (Dieudonne, 1953). Concurrent with 
this delay of the stall angle of attack is an increase in 
the max­ imum lift coefficient developed by the 
rudder. This ef­ fect is shown in Fig. 125, which also 
shows the important effect of surface roughness on 
maximum lift coefficient.
  The preceding deals with the effect of Reynolds 
num­ ber on stall in fully turbulent flow. At low 
Reynolds numbers, the flow about a model rudder 
may be lam­ inar rather than turbulent. Since laminar 
flow is much more susceptible to separation than is 
turbulent flow, laminar flow may be a factor in 
inducing premature stall in model tests of rudders.
  As a result of the foregoing considerations, model 
test results at low Reynolds numbers may be con­ 
servative in predicting the magnitudes of maximum 
lift coefficients for actual ships, which operate at 
com­ paratively high Reynolds numbers.
  In addition to scale effect on stall because of different 
Reynolds numbers, there is the possibility of scale 
effect because of dissimilar cavitation indexes between 
model and full scale. However, in contrast to stall scale 
effect, cavitation occurs at lower rudder angles or
42 	
GEOM. ASPECT RATIO• i
+	+	+
341--------l----1----+----1-----+--4	1
1/)


usually conducted at the speed determined by Froude's


II.I
1-----........


GEOM. ASPECT RATIO= I


Law, Reynolds number for the model rudder is much 
smaller than that for the actual rudder, that is:



1:1
II.I
C
z


---1--------1----4-----1


Reynolds number for model = a% X Reynolds num­
ber for ship where a is the scale ratio of the model to 
the ship.



.J 1z:1 C


261----+---r--::,' --+---+----+---+----f


  Wind tunnel test results as reported by Shiba (1960) 
for the NACA sections as shown in Figs. 124 and 125 
illustrate the important trends affecting the correlation 
of model test results to full scale ships:
  (a)	Maximum lift coefficient increases with Rey­ 
nolds number because of the delay of stall angle.
  (b)	Lift curve slope varies little with Reynolds 
number (also with section shape).


j22t----+--+-:::a
.;,!,


+ WHICKER & FEHlER (1958) ALL TESTS WITH GROUND BOARD
I	I
O LOFTEN & SMITH (1949)


  (c)	Drag coefficient decreases with increase of Rey­ 
nolds number.
Surface roughness must also be reviewed, because


IOL--....L.--.J.....----1.--..l.--..._. 	
08	1.2	1.6	2.0	2.4	2.8
REYNOLD'S NUMBERxlO"'


_. 	
3.2	3.6


it has an important effect on maximum lift coefficient


Fig. 126 Effect of Reynolds number on stall angle


296	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

SA•APPARENT SLIP RATIO

 


t----+--. ASPECT RATIO• 1.12 -+-


I	,---r,
1-----J.-----IASPECT  RATIO= 1.68-'-:
i	i


•.	a•


I
40° I






30°,





20• I




10°











04	0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
I/b







1.0	I.I



a.= RUDDER ANGLE TO PORT

 
·	PROPELLER IS RIGHT-HANDED 
(SEE  ALSO  FIG.25 )	1
12     0.4     0.5      0.6     0.7  0.8    09	1.0 I.I
-Ifb




I.	I

04	0.5    0.6	0.7	0.8    0.9	LO I.I
I/b



Fig. 127 Effect of rudder submergence ratio 1/b on rudder normal force coefficient (Shiba, 1960)





speeds on ships than on models run in accordance with 
Froude's Law.
Froude's Law dictates that the model speed be less



0,------,-----,----.....----..------,


than the ship speed, with the model speed equal to 
ship speed times the square root of the scale ratio. As 
long as geometric similitude is adhered to, the negative 
pressure on the downstream side of the rudder in coef­
ficient form,  - p / (p / 2)V 2  will  be  identical  between



-0.1
-z<o
w
>


P,iiPELLERiifioOv,D.j.•-ao1•
C8•  0.60    MOOELl,1,1
L/8= 7.5


model and ship. This will also be true of the hydrostatic 
pressure pgh l ( p / 2 )V 2 • However, atmospheric pres­ 
sure and vapor pressure have the same absolute value


iit-:0.21----+--+--= =--+-
SHIP
I-	SELF-PROPULSION
z	PO.INTI


for both model and ship, hence in coefficient form they


o·0.3 ---


MODEL
SELF-PROPULSION --4--""--


will be much larger for the model than for the ship. 
Since atmospheric pressure is usually the larger of 
these pressures, it delays the onset of cavitation to a 
higher Froude number on the model than that corre­ 
sponding to the speed of the full-scale ship. In any 
case, as noted earlier, the scale effect due to cavitation 
is not likely to be as severe as the scale effect due to 
stalling.
  If the rudder penetrates the free surface, as it does 
in the light condition for some ships, the occurrence


::I	POINT
a:
l&I
0
0::,
0::-0.4 ---1------1-----4--,'- 	.::,,""- 	




0.1	0.2	0.3	0.4
APPARENT SLIP RATIO, S11•






--I




0.5


of air drawing is a function of the Reynolds number


Fig. 128 Effect of propeller slip ratio on rudder moment derivative


CONTROLLABILITY	297



and Weber number of the experiment,  as  well as  of 
the angle of, the attack  and  the geometric  properties 
of the rudder. Shiba (1960) states that separation is a 
necessary but not sufficient condition for the occur­ 
rence of air drawing; that its occurrence in the model 
range also depends on the Weber number, W, defined 
here as

 
where
R is radius of leading edge of rudder
S is surface tension of water (force/unit length) 
pis mass density of water
V is velocity


r-------,
I	\
MIRROR IMAGE OF	/	\
CONTROL SURFACEj	\
I	\
I	\
I	\
I	\
I	\
I





ACTUAL CONTROL SURFACE- -


I2s


Shiba states that if W	0.15 X 10- 2 the occurrence


of air drawing ceases to be a function of the Weber 
number. Thus if this condition is met and separation 
(stall) is not occurring (Fig. 126) then presumably air 
drawing will not occur even if the rudder penetrates 
the free surface.
  Meijer (1964), however, indicates that no satisfac­ 
tory criteria have been established that relate the var­ 
ious factors that influence aeration. Gertler (1965) 
further indicates that there have been several high­ 
speed naval vessels for which the full-scale turning 
diameters are much larger than those obtained from 
free-turning model tests and that the cause is believed 
to be aeration occurring on the full scale but not on 
the model.	·
  Fortunately, when aeration does occur it is usually 
readily visible and can be remedied by installing a 
physical barrier between the  water  surface  and  the 
top of the rudder. Discussion by G. R. Hagen of Mandel 
(1953) indicates that aeration  rarely,  if  ever,  occurs 
on single-rudder ships if the top of the rudder is well 
submerged and is shielded from direct access  to the 
free surface by the ship's hull.
  Even if aeration does not occur, proximity to the 
free surface can cause a degradation in rudder per­ 
formance because of wave generation. Quantitative


fig. 129    Control  surface against groundboard



fig. 130 Control-surface model mounted over ground board in wind tunnel (al With 
faired tip	(bl Without faired tip


□□ o□□


data on this effect are shown in Fig. 127. In the or­ 
dinary free-running model test, this effect is properly 
scaled provided the model speeds are determined in 
accordance with Froude scaling laws.
  Usually, the ship's turning path or tactical diameter 
is practically independent of speed at Froude numbers 
less than about 0.30, but at higher ship speeds, the 
tactical diameter begins to increase, primarily because 
of the consequences of wavemaking. This increase for 
the full-scale ship could also be partly attributable to 
rudder cavitation. As the tactical diameter  increases, 
the inflow angle at the rudder, f3R, Fig. 122 decreases,


1.4

1.2
i 1.0
II.I
§oa
LI,,
LI,,
06
(.J
t::o.4
:::i
0.2


ASPt::CT  RATIO, a

o


with a consequent increase in the angle of attack of 
the rudder, which is being held at a constant deflection 
angle. The cause of severe rudder stall in free-turning 
tests is, then, very likely the increased angle of attack


10	15	20	25	30	35	40	45	50
RUDDER ANGLE IN DEGREES

Fig. 131 Effect of rudder aspect ratio on lift coefficient (Vonlammeren, Troost, 
and Koning, 19481


 



resulting from higher speed and not necessarily the 
high speed in itself.
  In addition to these kinds of scale effects, free-run- 
ning maneuvering tests of models of multiple rudder, 
multiple-propeller ships where the rudders are located 
in the propellers' slip streams are subject to additional 
scale effects because the velocity of the model propeller 
race relative to the free-stream velocity is larger than 
that of the ship propeller race. This is a Reynolds 
number effect; the much smaller Reynolds number of 
the model compared to that of the ship causes the 
model to have a larger drag coefficient, which in turn 
requires that the model propeller operate  at  a larger 
slip ratio than does the ship propeller, Fig. 128. For 
such ships, it might be expected that free-running 
model tests would underpredict the maneuvering char- 
acteristics of the full-scale ship.
  This scale effect applies also to single-propeller, sin- 
gle-rudder ships. However, these ships have a com- 
pensatory scale effect, because the rudder (and 
propeller) of these ships operate in flow heavily influ- 
enced by the hull ahead of the rudder.  Again  as  a 
result of the lower Reynolds number of the model, its 
frictional boundary layer and its stern separation zone 
are relatively thicker on the model than on the  ship. 
This greater relative thickness reduces the velocity of 
the flow to the propeller and to the rudder relative to


the free-stream velocity more on the model than  on  
the ship. Since this change in velocity is opposite  to 
the one caused by the difference in propeller slip ratio, 
these two scale effects tend to cancel each other in 
free-running maneuvering tests of models of single 
screw, single-rudder ships (Shiba, 1960).
  However, in free-running maneuvering tests of 
models where the flow to the rudder is not influenced 
by the hull ahead of it but the rudder is not abaft a 
propeller this cancelling effect would not take place. 
This lack of cancelling is shown by many commercial 
multiple-screw, single-rudder ships. Brard  (1951) 
states that model tests of these ships will overpredict 
the tactical diameter (for example) of the full-scale 
ship, possibly by as much as 10 to 15 percent, because 
of the failure of the hull wake to scale properly.
  14.4	Effed of Asped Ratio. A control surface of 
infinite aspect ratio has the same flow pattern in all 
planes perpendicular to the span. In other words, there 
is no flow component along the span and the flow over 
any section of the control surface is strictly two di- 
mensional. However, as noted in Section 14.1, in the 
case of a finite aspect-ratio, cross flow does occur over 
the root and over the tip  from the  high-pressure  side 
to the low-pressure side, thus  causing  the  flow over 
all sections to be three dimensional. This cross flow 
increases with decreasing span, and causes a concom-


CONTROLLABILITY	299


itant decrease in the lift generated by the rudder for 
any given angle of attack.
  The preceding physical picture leads to the concept 
of effective aspect ratio. If the root section of a control


radians to aspect ratio for any constant lift 
coefficient:
(122a)


surface is sufficiently close to the hull that all cross 
flow over the root is prevented, the lift coefficient de­ 
veloped by that control surface for any given angle of


a'   =  a + CL	! )
1r	a'	a


(122b)


attack  is identical  to that of  a control surface of twice	where  Cv and  a  correspond  to an aspect  ratio a,  and
its geometric aspect ratio. Fig. 129 shows this doubling	Cv'     and a'  correspond  to an aspect ratio a'.  Fig. 131


effect by projecting a "mirror image" of a control 
surface flush against a groundboard. In computing the 
lift generated, the area of control surface to use is 
that bounded by the solid lines, but its effective aspect 
ratio, a, is 2s/c rather than sic.
  On the basis of this discussion, the control surface 
in Fig. 125, for example, described as "geometric as­ 
pect ratio = 1; with groundboard," has an effective 
aspect ratio, a, of 2. Photographs of two control sur­ 
faces like those reported on in Fig. 125, mounted 
against a groundboard in a wind tunnel are shown in 
Fig. 130 (Fig. 137, presented in the next section, also 
shows directly the effect of aspect ratio on lift-curve 
slope).
  In the middle 1920's, Prandtl of Germany developed 
a reasonably accurate  theory for predicting the effect  
of aspect ratio on lift and drag. This theory applies to 
control surfaces whose spanwise  load-distribution 
curve is elliptical in shape. The theory shows that for 
such control surfaces, the following simple expressions 
relate the drag coefficient and the angle of attack in


shows the relationship between lift coefficient and 
as­ pect ratio (down to ¾) as computed from 
Equation (122b) based on experimental data for an 
aspect ratio of 5.0. Fig. 131 shows clearly that the 
slope of the lift­
coefficient curve versus angle of attack decreases 
sharply with decreasing aspect ratio. This relationship 
is consistent with theoretical formulations of lift-curve 
slope (Weinig, 1947) as well as experimental data 
(Lof­ ten and Smith, 1949, and Larson, 1946). The 
latter is shown in Fig. 18 of Mandel (1953).
  As computed from Equation (122b), Fig. 131 shows 
the maximum lift coefficient to be independent of as­ 
pect ratio. This independence is not borne out by ex­ 
periment. For example, Fig. 125 shows that a control 
surface with an effective aspect ratio (twice the "geo­ 
metric" aspect ratio) of 2 achieves a larger maximum 
lift coefficient than does an effective aspect ratio of 3. 
However, Fig. 125 also shows that the effect of Rey­ 
nolds number  and of surface roughness are  much 
more

(Continued  on page 302)



1.4 -- -- -- -- ------------------------,






OBt----	-+u---t--------J---+	-+----+----l 	.	_.... 	...,.
11:	X PROFILES INCLUDED IN TABLE 10
D RECTANGULAR PROFILES INCLUDED





_


4LOc----:_2LO:-----,_ILO---◊L-JK)L-J20=---J30=----4lo::: 50r 60 7do JBO!IIIII-J90
SWEEP ANGLE OF THE QUARTER CHORD IN DEGREES
Fig.  134  Theoretical  relationship  between  taper  ratio  and  sweep  angle  to  achieve  an  elliptical  spanwise  load  distribution  (Whicker 
and Fehlner, 1958)


300	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 13-Effect of Aspect Ratio, Sweep Angle and Tip Shape on the Free-Stream
(all control surfaces tested againai
( £) ,


Item	,:,	A,	Section	Tip	Rn X 10...
No.  Profile	ft	a	deg	}.	t/c	Shape	Shape	of test



Direction


per
degree



1 "-....1	


--	2.0	1	-8	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	2.25	Ahead	0.023


2 '\I


F
a
i
r
e
d
	
2
.
2
8
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
0
'
2
1
2
.
0
	
2
	
-
8
	
0
.
4
5
	
0
.
1
5
	
N
A
C
A
	
S
q
u
a
r
e
	
2
.
7
2
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
0
4
F
a
i
r
e
d
	
2
.
7
2
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
0
3
9


3 '\J	


-	2.0	3	-8	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	2.26	Ahead	0.056


0015	Square	3.00	Astern	0.023
Faired	2.29	Ahead	0.0'20
5	\]		-	2.0	2	0	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	2.72	Ahead	0.04
0015	Square	3.00	Astern	0.039
Faired	2.72	Ahead	0.04
6    V	-	2.0	3	0	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	2.70	Ahead	0.054


8	V	--



0
0
1
5
	
S
q
u
a
r
e
	
3
.
0
0
	
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
0
.
0
2
3
F
a
i
r
e
d
	
2
.
2
8
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
0
'
2
1
2.0	2	11	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	2.72	Ahead	0.042
0
0
1
5
	
S
q
u
a
r
e
	
3
.
0
0
	
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
0
.
0
2
6


0	-	2.0	3	11	0.45·	0.15	NACA	Square	2.26	Ah ad	0.050
0015	Square	3.00	Astern	0.046
Faired	2.26	Ahead	0.054
3.0	2	22.5	0.45	0.15	NACA	Square	3.00	Ahead	0.045
()()15





Table 14-Effect of Section Shape on Free-Stream Characteristics of
(all control surfaces tested against.
( £)  ,
Item	,:,	Tip	Section	Rn X 10-•
No.	Profile



2	u	--
3	\J	--
-


0
0
1
5
	
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
3
.
0
0
	
0
.
0
3
8
8
2.0	2	0	0.45	0.167	Square	TMB	Ahead	2.70	0.0382
E
H
P
	
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
3
.
0
0
	
0
.
0
3
2
5
2.0	2	0	0.45	0.167	Square	NSS	Ahead	2.70	0.0332
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
3
.
0
0
	
0
.
0
3
6
2
2.0	2	0	0.45	0.167	Square	TMB	Ahead	2.77	0.04


4	V
5	\_]


F
a
i
r
i
n
g
	
A
s
t
e
r
n
	
3
.
0
0
	
0
.
0
4
6
N
o
.
 
7
-	2.0	2	0	0.45	0.15	Square	TMB	Ahead	2.77	0.0481


CONTROLLABILITY	301
Characteristics of All-Movable Control Surfaces (Whicker and Fehlner, 1958) 
poundboard wit.Ji gap - 0.005«,)
Stall	a for	LID@    --{CP)'c @--	--{CP)'i @--


<h@	CL@	Angle, (LID)maz	LID@   LID@	Stall
100	20°	Cc._,.	deg	deg	LID..,.  a•    10° a  -  20° Angle


a-	a•
100	Stall	10•	Stall


25	0.59	1.24	39.4	8	8.0	7.45	4.24	2.0	0.14	0.30	0.48	0.51
0.30	0.67	0.96	31.2	8	5.4	5.36	2.85	1.7	0.20	0.27	0.45	0.42
0.23	0.53	1.03	36.3	8	8.2	7.66	4.27	1.8	0.10	0.32	0.46	0.49
0.42	0.91	1.33	28.7	6	12.2	10.1	5.9	4.0	0.18·	0.25	0.45	0.48
0.40	0.64	0.64	21.0	7	6.8	5.89	2.4	2.3	0.18	0.20	0.40	0.39
0.41	0.86	1.24	28.8	5	13.0	10.9	5.9	4.0	0.18	0.24	0.44	0.41
0.56	1.09	1.13	21.0	4.6	15.8	12.05	6.95	6.8	0.19	0.22	0.44	0.45
0.46	0.62	17.4	5	8.1	5.75	2.7	0.13	0.17	0.38	0.40
0.51	1.02	1.21	24.0	4.4	15.4	12.15	6.8	5.4	0.195	0.24	0.44	0.47
0.27	0.60	1.26	38.5	7.0	8.0	7.16	4.25	2.2	0.16	0.31	0.48	0.50
0.30	0.68	0.93	29.2	7.8	5.5	5.1	2.9	1.9	0.19	0.26	0.42	0.41
o._24	0.54	1.11	36.4	8	8.2	7.35	4.31	2.0	0.11	0.31	0.46	0.49
0.44	0.93	1.33	28.7	5.5	12.4	10.35	5.79	4.0	0.19	0.25	0.45	0.48
0.40	0.62	0.63	19.2	6.8	6.8	5.41	2.54	2.7	0.15	0.18	0.41	0.41
0.42	0.87	1.17	26.8	5	13.0	10.61	5.88	4.2
0.55	1.10	1.25	23.0	4.5	16.0	12.4	7.05	6.0	0.18	0.23	0.45	0.48
0.46	0.59	15.5	5.2	7.5	6.05	3.3	0.11	0.16	0.42	0.42
0.53	1.05	1.14	22.0	4.6	16.2	12.6	7.1	6.4	0.20	0.22	0.44	0.46
0.26	0.60	1.40	43.4	7.0	8.2	7.42	4.22	1.7	0.17	0.34	0.46	0.49
0.29	0.67	0.84	28.2	8.0	5.7	5.00	2.92	1.8	0.17	0.26	0.42	0.40
0.25	0.55	1.21	39.4	7.0	8.3	8.80	4.44	2.0	0.12	0.32	0.45	0.50
0.45	0.94	1.33	28.8	4.0	13.2	10.20	5.73	4.0	0.19	0.25	0.46	0.48
0.39	0.61	0.65	18.2	8.0	6.8	6.21	2.52	3.1	0.12	0.19	0.42	0.44
0.44	0.90	1.18	26.8	4.6	14.0	10.50	5.70	4.4	0.18	0.23	0.44	0.47
0.52	10.5	1.25	24.2	5·.o	15.5	12.85	7.00	5.6	0.20	0.24	0.44	0.47
0.48	0.57	13.4	5.6	7.4	5.22	3.6	0.10	0.16	0.42	0.44
0.54	10.55	1.08	20.9	4.0	16.8	12.72	7.03	5.6	0.185	0.21	0.44	0.45
0.46	0.96	1.46	31.8	5.2	10.6	9.10	5.45	3.3	0.22	0.26	0.44	0.49





All-Movable Control Surfaces (Whicker and Fehlner, 19 58)
ll'OUndboard with gap • 0.005«,)	(CP');@	(CP');@
                    Stall		a for		LID@	LID@    LID@		a--		.. a=-- 
l'L@	CL®		angle,   (LID)_,_,			a-		a•		stall				Stall			Stall 
10°	200	C1-	deg	deg	LID...,.	10°	20°	angle	10°		Pt.		10°	Pt.
0.435	0.93	1.32	28.3	5.5	12.3	10.35	5.81	4	0.195	0.25	0.425	0.48
0.39	0.63	0.63	20.0	6.8	6.8	5.42	2.58	2.5	0.15	0.19	0.41	0.41
0.392	0.85	1.18	27.8	6.4	12	10.9	5.99	4.4	0.15	0.21	0.45	0.48
0.395	0.61	0.61	23.3	8	7.3	6.37	2.6	2.5	0.16	0.19	0.41	0.40
0.375	0.842	1.24	29.7	6.6	12.2	10.7	5.93	4.0	0.12	0.22	0.45	0.48
0.4	0.635	0.66	18.0	8	9.7	8.9	2.87	3.5	0.14	0.15	0.43	0.41
0.42	0.885	1.13	24.5	7	10.2	9.55	5.82	4.8	0.13	0.20	0.45	0.48
0.44	0.865	0.89	21.5	10	6.7	6.66	3.23	2.7	0.21	0.26	0.41	0.41

0.51	1.65	1.45	26.9	6	10.9	8.8	5.60	4.1	0.20	0.24	0.46	0.49
0.505	0.886	0.89	20.0	8	4.8	4.43	2.59	2.6	0.13	0.29	0.42	0.41


302	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Tobie 15-Effect of  Toper  Ratio and Tip Shope on the
(all control surfaces tested against


Item	c,	A,	Section	Tip	Rn X 10- 4
No.	Profile	ft	a	deg	tic	>..	Shape	Shape	of test	Direction	Ref. Fig. No.
•
0015	Faired	3.0	Ahead	22(a:/)	•
2	3.0	2	11	0.15	0.60	NACA	Square	3.0	Ahead	7(a-a)
0015	Faired	3.0	Ahead	22(a-cl)
3	2.0	2	11	0.15	0.45	NACA	Square	2.72	Ahead	60	t
0015	Square	3.00	Astern	94	t
Faired	2.72	Ahead	85	t
4	V	3.0	2	11	0.15	0.20	NACA	Square	3.0	Ahead	7(a-cl)	•



(Continued from page 299)

significant than the effect of aspect ratio on maximum 
lift coefficient. Since the magnitude of the roughness 
on a ship's rudder is not known with precision, and 
since test data at full-scale Reynolds number are not 
usually available, the precise effect of aspect ratio on 
maximum lift is not of practical importance.
  14.5	Free-Stream Charaderistics of All-Movable Low 
Asped-Ratio Control Surfaces. The decade 1950-1960 
saw considerable wind tunnel, free-stream testing of 
all-movable, low aspect-ratio control surfaces suitable 
for ship application. As a result of this effort, reliance 
on the Joessel formulas (Equations 44 and 45 of Van 
Lammeren et al, (1948)), which, in spite of their known 
inadequacy, had been extensively used in practical de­ 
sign work since their publication in 1892, has become 
unnecessary.
  The most important of the works of the decade is 
reported by Whicker and Fehlner (1958). As will be 
seen in Tables 12 and 13, it includes a large variety of 
control-surface profile shapes (projections on the plane 
of the chord and the span) as well as section shapes.


Results include almost all of the 
hydrodynamic data necessary for rudder 
design, namely, lift  coefficient CL, drag 
coefficient CD, moment coefficient about 
the quarter-chord point (Cm)c   i 4 , distance 
of center of pres­
sure from  the  leading  ecige CPc and  distance  of the
center of pressure from the roof section 
C for rud­ ders operating in both the 
ahead and astern directions. The 
maximum test Reynolds numbers vary 
from about two million to three million. 
Samples of the data avail­ able showing 
results in both the ahead and astern 
condition are shown in Figs. 132 and 
133.
  One of the effects of geometric 
properties thor­ oughly studied by 
Whicker and Fehlner (1958) is the effect 
of tip shape. All profiles were tested 
with tips squared off or faired with 
circular arcs, Fig. 130. Fig.
125 shows that the sections with 
squared-off tips achieve a substantially 
larger maximum lift than the sections 
with faired tips. This result is consistent 
with an increase in the stall angle with 
squared-off tips. In most cases, 
however, the faired tips reduced the drag 
by a small amount at all angles of attack, 
as shown  in Tables 13 and 15 from 
Whicker and Fehlner (1958) and 
Windsor (1962).
It has been shown theoretically that 
there is a re-






.I.I),
z
:i:
1-
..J
Cz(
0
.z.,


0.3



0.2


iii 0.1
:I!
czi
0
z 0









LEADING END




N
O
N
D
I
M
E
N
S
I
O
N
A
L
 
C
H
O
R
D
 
L
E
N
G
T
H
,
 
f
Fig. 135 
Section 
shapes of 
control 
surfoces 
(Whicker 
and 
Fehlner, 
1958)








O
TRAILI
NG 
END


CONTROLLABILITY	303


Free Stream Characteristics of All-Movable Control Surfaces (Windsor, 1962) 
groundboard with gap = 0.005c)
(acL)
aa   a-0				Stall	LID@	LID@	LID@		(CP')			(CP')			a for 
per	CL@	CL@	Angle,		a=		a=		Stall	-	a=	-	-a=		-	(LID)max








•	Windsor, 1962.
t Whicker and Fehlner, 1958.










-f----


 
	
P
L
A
T
E
 
t
i
c
 
=
0
.
0
1
5

 
	
P
L
A
T
E
  
t
i
c
 
•
 
0
.
0
3
	

lfS  58 TR 
15	 	I    -		-::::t-
P
L
A
T
E
  
t
i
c
 
•
 
0
.
0
5



-f-------E t


-1::::

-E



 
PLATE Ve• 0.07
FLAT  PLATE SECTIONS
 	"'(E"LLIIPBSREI)O-	


.=l-

:3->


 	i)	BOW RUDDER SECTIONS
BALANCED RUDDER SECTIONS

Fig. 136    Section  shopes of  Table 16 (Thieme, 1965)







Table 16-Effect of Section Shape and Thickness-Chord Ratio on the Free-Stream Characteristics of Square (Aspect Ratio = 1, Square Tips), All-Movable
Control Surfaces Without Groundboard (Thieme,  1965)
('1CL)	Approx.


Item	Direc•	Rn X	aa  a-o	Ci@
No.	Section Shape	tic	tion	10-•	Ref. Fig. No.	per degree	10"	o·


Ci-.


Stall	a for	LID	LID	LID -(CP'J - angle (LID)mu 
LID.... @ 10" @ 20" @ stall @ 10" @ stall


1    Flat plate	?	Either	?	6'	0.028	0.38	0.89	38


,u
0.272	0.411


2	Flat plate	0.015   Either	0.71	36	0.028	0.35	0.75	1.20	39	5	4.4	4.4	2.8	1.3	0.264	0.400	()


3	Flat plate	0.030   Either	0.71	37	0.0305	0.34	0.72	1.14	40	5	4.0	3.8	2.5	1.3	0.275	0.414
4	Flat plate	0.050   Either	0.67	38	0.029	0.34	0.70	1.12	40	10	2.9	2.8	2.2	1.2	0.311	0.432


.::.;.;


5	Flat plate	0.070   Either	0.71	39	0.0325	0.32	0.65	1.00	38.5	9	2.6	2.5	2.1	1.2	0.303	0.429	VI


6	TMB 075-075-15   0.15	Ahead	0.69	18	0.0275	0.29	0.58	0.88	37.5	9	2.7	2.6	2.2	1.3	0.347	0.413
Astern	0.56	19	0.0364	0.34	0.70	1.12	37	8	2.9	2.8	2.2	1.3


.0..,


7    NACA 0015	0.15	Ahead	0.79	20	0.028	0.29	0.62	1.06	33.8	9	7.2	7.2	4.4	2.3	0.178	0.353	z


8    NACA 0025	0.25


Astern	0.56	21	0.048	0.38	0.64	1.06	40	8	3.9
Ahead	0.78	22	0.0275	0.27	0.59	1.34	46	10	5.4	5.4	4.2	1.7	0.196	0.352	<


Astern	0.56	23	0.0534	0.41	0.67	0.93	38.3	8	3.0	2.9	2.3	1.2


►...


9    IFS 58 TR 15	0.15	Ahead	0.78	24	0.030	0.32	0.67	1.18	33.5	10	6.4	6.4	3.9	2.4	0.247	0.330
Astern	0.56	25	0.0264	0.27	0.65	1.11	40	9	3.0	3.0	2.2	1.3	,u
10	IFS 58 TR 25	0.25	Ahead	0.78	26	0.031	0.31	0.66	1.45	48	8	4.0	3.9	3.5	1.5	0.294	0.375	()


Astern	0.56	27	0.0302	0.29	0.67	0.98	40	10	2.1	2.1	1.9	1.1


:I:


11	IFS 61 TR 25	0.25	Ahead	0.79	28	0.030	0.32	0.69	1.34	41	9	4.0	4.0	3.6	1.8	0.256	0.353	m
Astern	0.56	29	0.0284	0.30	0.66	1.00	41	10	2.0	2.0	1.7	1.1	Q
12	IFS 62 TR 25	0.25	Ahead	0.78	30	0.032	0.33	0.71	1.48	46	10	4.8	4.7	3.6	1.5	0.265	0.359	C


Astern	0.56	31	0.0294	0.42	0.70	1.05	38	9	2.5
13	IFS 55 BR 15	0.15	Either	0.71	32	0.040	0.34	0.60	0.72	30	10	5.7
14	IFS 54 BR 15	0.15	Either	0.78	33	0.030	0.34	0.63	0.99	37.2	9	2.9
15	IFS 59 BR 15	0.15	Either	0.78	34	0.033	0.34	0.65	1.03	38	10	2.5
16	IFS 57 BR 15	0.15	Either	0.72	35	0.0295	0.29	0.67	1.04	40	5	6.6
1 Original Edition of Principles of Naval Architecture, Vol. II, Chapter 4, Figures 6, 7, and 8 (1939)


,u
2.5	2.1	1.2	m
5.7	3.3	1.6	0.300	0.366
2.8	2.2	1.3	0.337	0.422
2.4	2.2	1.2	0.370	0.425
4.1	2.6	1.2	0.364	0.407


CONTROLLABILITY	305
0.10


























0	2	3	4	5	6
EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO, a

Fig. 137 Effect of aspect ratio on lift-curve slope

lationship, shown in Fig. 134, between sweep  angle 
and taper ratio for which the spanwise center-of-pres­ 
sure location is independent of aspect ratio. Profiles 
conforming to this relationship should also have min­ 
imum drag, increased cavitation resistance, and im­ 
proved lift-curve slopes. However, experimental data 
shown in Tables 13 and 15 for profiles not conforming 
to this relationship do not in all cases confirm these


























7	8	9


theoretical advantages. In general, Table 13 shows 
that variations of sweep angle from +22.5 to -8 deg
for  a  constant  taper  ratio  of  0.45  do not significant	0


affect the free-stream characteristics. However, Table 
15 shows that as the taper ratio is increased from 0.2 
to 0.8 for a constant sweep angle of +11 deg, the
maximum lift coefficient and the stall angle are in­ 
creased.
  Tables 14 and 16 summarize the effect of section 
shape on free-stream characteristics from Whicker and 
Fehlner (1958) and Thieme (1965). The section shapes 
tested are shown in Figs. 135 and 136. These data 
indicate that a wide selection of section shapes have 
reasonably good characteristics, as shown by large 
values of oCL/ oa, CLmax• and low center-of-pressure 
travel. In the United States the NACA symmetrical 
sections have been widely used.
  Quite apart from section shape, the effect of thick­ 
ness-to-chord ratio on control-surface characteristics 
is also of importance. This effect is shown in Table 16 
(after Thieme, 1965, and Principles of Naval Archi­ 
tecture, 1939, Figs. 6, 7, and 8) and Table 17 (after 
Windsor, 1962, and Principles of Naval Architecture,



Iii
.§..
Iii
0
0


II:
0
3'
...
0
II:
0



























D	02	0.4	.0.6
TAPER RATIO



























0.8	1.0


1939, Figs. 6, 7, and 8) for rectangular-shaped control 
surfaces tested without groundboards. It is seen that


Fig. 138


Effect of tip shape and taper ratio, A, on crossflow drag coefficient (Whicker and 
Fuhlner, 1958)


306	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 17-Effect of Thickness-Chord Ratio and Aspect Ratio on the Free-Stream Characteristics of Rectangular


Item	A,	Section	Tip	Rn X 10-•
No.	Profile*	a	deg	A	tic	Shape	Shape	Direction	of test	Ref.	Fig. No.
1	5.0	0	1.0	0	Plate	Square	Either	?	PNA	6
2	1.0	0	1.0	0	Plate	Square	Either	?	PNA	6


3	-
5	-
6	-
7	-
8	-
9	-
10	-
11	-
12	-
13	-
14	-
-

 


0.2	0
	1.0
	0
	Plate
	?
	Either
	?
	PNA
	6
6.0	0
	1.0
	0.06
	NACA	?	Ahead	?	PNA	7, 8
0
0
0
6
6.0	0
	1.0
	0.12
	NAC
A	?
	Ahead	?	PNA	7, 8
0
0
1
2
6.0	0
	1.0
	0.18
	NAC
A	?
	Ahead	?	PNA	7, 8
0
0
1
8
6.0	0
	1.0
	0.25
	NACA	?	Ahead	?	PNA	7, 8
0
0
2
5
6
.
0
	
0
	
1
.
0
	
0
.
1
2
	
	
N
A
C
A
	
S
q
u
a
r
e
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
6
	
W
i
n
d
s
o
r
	
3
3
-
3
3
(
d
)
 
0
0
1
2
6.0	0
	1.0
	0.15
	NAC
A
	Squar
e	Ahead	0.6	Windsor	8(a-d)
0
0
1
5
3
.
0
	
0
	
1
.
0
	
0
.
1
2
	
	
N
A
C
A
	
S
q
u
a
r
e
	
A
h
e
a
d
	
0
.
6
	
W
i
n
d
s
o
r
	
3
3
-
3
3
(
d
)
 
0
0
1
2
3.0	0
	1.0
	0.15
	NAC
A
	Squar
e	Ahead	0.6	Windsor	8(a-d)
0
0
1
5
1.34	0
	1.0
	0.12
	NAC
A	Faired
	Ahead	1.58	Windsor	37-37(d)
0
0
1
2
2.61	0
	1.0
	0.12
	NAC
A	Faired
	Ahead	1.1	Windsor	37-37(d)
0
0
1
2
5.16	0
	1.0
	0.12
	NAC
A	Faired
	Ahead	0.99	Windsor	37-37(d)
0
0
1
2


16	....


2.13	0	1.0	0.10	64A010	Faired	Ahead	3.1	Windsor	50-50 d)
4.13	0	1.0	0.10	64A010	Faired	Ahead	2.2	Windsor	50-50 cl)







flat-plate sections have the poorest free-stream char­ 
acteristics, whereas sections with thickness-to-chord 
ratios of about 0.12 to 0.18 have the  best.  Table 15 
also shows this result.
  In addition to containing extensive experimental 
data, [Whicker and Fehlner (1958)] show that reason­ 
able correlation exists between existing experimental 
data and the following theoretical and semi-empirical


a = effective aspect ratio
A = sweep angle of the quarter-chord line
a = angle of attack in degrees
CD  = crossflow drag coefficient 
dependent on
c	both tip shape and taper ratio (see Fig.
138)
Drag coefficient: 4


equations for estimating free-stream, low-aspect-ratio, 
all-movable-control-surface characteristics:


cD = cdo + -C-/


(124)


"f	ff."	t  C	(acL)	CD, (   a )2	(123  )
57

 


where
Ctio = minimum section drag coefficient; Cdo =
0.0065 for NACA 0015 section
e = so-called "Oswald" efficiency factor; 
e = 0.90 from Whicker and Fuhlner 
(1958)


=	(0.9)(2,r)a	(


perd


egree)


Moment coefficient about the quarter 
chord:


57.3 [ ( cos A .Jco::A  + 4)  + 1.8]
where




(123b)


[ 0.2_5




(acm)	](acL) acL CL _ 0		aa a = 0


(aCL)	= slope of lift coefficient with respect to
0
  

•	A comparison between theory as given by 
Equation (123b) and experimental data given in 
Table 13 is shown in Fig. 137 from Whicker 
and Fehlner (1958) and Jones (1952).


CONTROLLABILITY	307
All-Movable Control Surfaces Without Groundboard (Windsor, 1962 and PNA, 1939)


(°CL)
aa a-o


Stall


a for
L/


L/D@	(CP'r.


per	CL@	CL@	Angle,	Dmax,	L/D@	L/D@	Stall -a=-





























where














acm)	_ slope  
0












-	Cve ( 
)2	(125)
2	57.3


the moment 
C?efficient,






































1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2





































0.64
0.60
0-56
0.52
0-48


(ac	- Cm " with respect to hft coeffi-
L CL-o	cient CL at CL	0
1	1.11 [(a 2  + 4)	+ 2
2	4(a + 2)
(aocaL)a  -     0  .IS  gi.venb yE quati.on (123b)
  Center-of-pressure chordwise distance from the 
leading edge:



I
., 1.0
uo.9
gl&oI   .7
0.6
,u_0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2



0-44 j
0.40 g
n
0.36
0,32 O
0-28
0,24
0
020
0.16
012
0.00




where


(CP) = 
(0.2_5


(CCc1,)	(126)



0.I
0
-0.1



0-04
0
-0,04


CN = normal force coefficient= C! cos a + CD sin
a
  Center-of-pressure spanwise distance from the root 
section:



-8	0	8	16	24	32	40
ANGLE OF ATTACK, a: IN DEGREES

Fig. 139 Effect of type of bounding surfoce on characteristics of an all­ movable 
control surface (Harper and Sinitses, 1959)


308	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

with a geometric aspect ratio of 1.0 tested against both 
a groundboard in the conventional manner and against 
a conical half-body of revolution. A photograph of the 
test setup is shown in Fig. 140, and the necessary 
modifications to the rudder profile for the two tests 
are shown in Fig. 141. The conical-shaped body of rev­ 
olution has a body diameter at the quarter-chord of 
the rudder of 0.3 times the mean geometric chord of 
the rudder and a half-angle of closure of 12 deg. Fig. 
139 shows that the rudder against the body of revo­ 
lution has the same lift-curve slope at the origin as










Fig. 140 Control-surface model mounted against  simulated  body  of  revo­ 
lution (Harper and Sinitses 1959)

Fig. 141 Outline of rudders used



/----
LIFT DEVELOPED BY ANGLE OF ATTACK
(al ALL-MOVABLE RUDDER

------------ ---::)-
LIFT DEVELOPED BY FIXED
(bl AIRPLANE WING



4_ OF SHIP






(CP).  =  (3 ) b	(127)
for profiles with taper ratios and sweep angles con­ 
forming to the relationship shown in Fig. 134 for an 
elliptical spanwise loading distribution.
  14.6	Influence of Hull Shape on Effective Aspect Ra­ 
tio of All-Movable Control Surfaces. Generally, the 
idealization achieved when a rudder is tested against 
a groundboard is not realized when the rudder is lo­ 
cated adjacent to a ship's hull. While it may be possible 
to achieve a very small gap between the root section 
of the rudder and the adjacent ship hull at zero rudder 
angle, the gap will increase in size as the rudder is 
laid over because the ship's hull immediately over the 
rudder is rarely a plane surface normal to the rudder 
stock. Hence, while the effective aspect ratio of a rud­ 
der may be twice its geometric aspect ratio at zero 
deflection angle, this ratio will decrease as the rudder 
is laid over.
  Fig. 139 taken from Harper and Simitses (1959) 
shows wind tunnel test results of a control surface









LIFT DEVELOPED BY VARIABLE CAMBER
(CJ RUDDER BEHIND FIXED STRUCTURE

LIFT DEVELOPED BY ANGLE OF ATTACK+ VARIABLE CAMBER
(d)	ALL-MOVABLE RUDDER WITH TAIL FLAP

Fig. 142 Four variations 
of lifting surfaces


CONTROLLABILITY	309





rSE-CTIO







PRO,ILE




SCALE FOR AMiAT

Fig. 144
---.!:!-




a)	IN A STRAIGHT LINE PATH /SR= 0



bl IN A STEADY TURN, /&11 #- 0



- Fig. 145 Inflow velocity to a rudder with fixed structure





















P'IIO,ILE

Fig. 143 Typical balanced and semi-balanced rudders with fixed structure


the rudder against the groundboard. Thus the effective aspect 
ratio of the rudder at zero deflection angle with both boundary 
conditions is two. However, at angles of attack greater than 
about 6 deg, the lift curves for the two boundary conditions 
begin to diverge, and the maximum lift of the rudder against 
the body of rev­ olution is only about 80 percent of the lift 
against the groundboard. Applying Equation (122b) to the 
data given in Fig. 139, the effective aspect ratio of the rud­ der 
against the body of revolution is essentially a linear function of 
rudder angle varying from two at zero rudder angle to 1.7 at 
27 deg. Beyond 27 deg the effective aspect ratio drops off 
more rapidly to a value of about 1.5 at the stall angle of 31 
deg. While this is an isolated experiment its implications are 
important, for it shows that even at large angles of attack a 
hull that is only moderately close to a rudder serves to 
increase its effective aspect ratio well beyond its geo­ metric 
value.
  14.7	Influence of Fixed Strudure and Flapped Control 
Surfaces. The all-movable rudder has several impor­ tant 
variants. If a fixed structure is placed just ahead of the rudder 
in a manner similar to that shown in Fig. 142(c), the forces and 
moments acting on the rudder


310	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




------8,925  (ROOT   CHORD)-----





I ! I
HINGE LINE POSITIONS


as well as the forces and moments 
acting on the ship, due to rudder 
deflection, will be different from 
what they would be if the fixed 
structure were absent. A rudder 
consisting of both a fixed and a 
movable portion as shown in Fig. 
142(c) will generally  produce a 
larger
control  force  (with  the ship  moving  in the  ahead 
di­


!  j'  i
l	l
iI        '
t	I i
!
I
*

10,000










M.A.C.
\
I
1x/1	'
<
I


i
i'ti
\
6



FOR  ZERO 
BALANCE
I	I	I
	I	I
60 50 40 30 20 
!PERCENT!


r
e
c
t
i
o
n
)
 
t
h
a
n
 
i
f
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
x
e
d
  
p
o
r
t
i
o
n
  
w
e
r
e
  
m
i
s
s
i
n
g
.
  
S
u
c
h
 
a
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
i
s
 
s
o
m
e
t
i
m
e
s
 
c
a
l
l
e
d
 
a
 
f
l
a
p
p
e
d
 
o
r
 
h
i
n
g
e
d
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
(
B
o
w
e
r
s
,
 
1
9
5
9
)
.
 
I
f
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
x
e
d
 
p
o
r
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
i
s
 
c
l
e
a
r
l
y
 
d
e
f
i
n
a
b
l
e
 
a
s
 
p
a
r
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
,
 
a
s
 
i
t
 
i
s
 
f
o
r
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
i
n
 
F
i
g
s
.
 
1
4
3
(
a
)
 
a
n
d
 
1
4
3
(
b
)
,
 
t
h
e
n
 
a
l
l
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
g
e
o
m
e
t
r
i
c
 
p
r
o
p
e
r
t
i
e
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
a
s
p
e
c
t
 
r
a
t
i
o
,
 
t
h
i
c
k
n
e
s
s
-
t
o
-
c
h
o
r
d
 
r
a
t
i
o
,
 
t
a
p
e
r
 
r
a
t
i
o
,
 
a
n
d
 
s
o
 
o
n
 
s
h
o
u
l
d
 
b
e
 
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
d
 
a
s
 
i
f
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
x
e
d
 
p
o
r
t
i
o
n
 
w
e
r
e
 
i
n
 
f
a
c
t
 
a
n
 
i
n
t
e
g
r
a
l
 
p
a
r
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
.
 
B
y
 
a
n
a
l
o
g
y
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
a
i
r
­
 
p
l
a
n
e
 
w
i
n
g
 
s
h
o
w
n
 
i
n
 
F
i
g
.
 
1
4
2
(
b
)
,
 
a
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
  
c
o
n
s
i
s
t
i
n
g
 
o
f
 
a
 
c
o
m
b
i
n
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
m
o
v
a
b
l
e
 
a
n
d
 
f
i
x
e
d
 
p
o
r
t
i
o
n
s
 
d
e
v
e
l
­
 
o
p
s
 
i
t
s
 
l
i
f
t
 
b
y
 
m
e
a
n
s
 
o
f
 
v
a
r
y
i
n
g
 
i
t
s
 
c
a
m
b
e
r
  
a
s
  
w
e
l
l
 
a
s
 
b
y
 
v
a
r
y
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
a
n
g
l
e
 
o
f
 
a
t
t
a
c
k
.
 
T
h
i
s
 
d
i
s
t
i
n
c
t
i
o
n
 
i
s
 
e
m
­
 
p
h
a
s
i
z
e
d
 
i
n
 
F
i
g
.
 
1
4
2
.
  T
h
e
 
f
a
v
o
r
a
b
l
e
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
x
e
d
 
s
t
r
u
c
t
u
r
e
 
a
h
e
a
d
  
o
f
  
a
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
o
n
 
l
i
f
t
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
a
h
e
a
d
 
c
o
n
d
i
t
i
o
n
 
w
i
t
h
 
z
e
r
o
 
i
n
f
l
o
w
 
a
n
g
l
e
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
x
e
d
 
s
t
r
u
c
t
u
r
e
 
w
a
s
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
e
d
 
i
n
 
a
 
s
e
t
 
o
f
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
s
 
c
o
n
d
u
c
t
e
d
 
b
y
 
B
o
t
t
o
m
l
e
y
 
(
1
9
3
5
)
 
a
n
d


L2.836--->--- 5.355 (Tip CHORDl 	j

Fig. 146

E--
NO.I	20% FLAP	0% BALANCE





N0.2	30% FLAP	0% BALANCE


21.2 -	BALANCE

 

N0.3	30% FLAP	39.05% BALANCE
Fig. 147 Root sections of eoch of the models tested showing flop proportions 
ond location of flap hinge point


shown in Fig. 144. That figure shows, 
for  example, that at rudder angles of 30 
to 40 deg,  a  25-percent fixed 75-
percent movable rudder combination 
produced more than 90 percent of the 
lift produced by an all­ movable rudder 
of the same total area. In Bottomley's 
experiments, there was no gap between 
the leading edge of the movable portion 
and the trailing edge of  the fixed 
structure for any angular deflection of 
the rudder. Generally in the practical 
case, the movable portion incorporates 
some balance area forward of the 
centerline of  the stock as shown  in 
Fig. 143, in order to reduce the torque 
on the rudder. With balance, some gap 
is inevitable between the fixed structure 
and the movable portion at large 
deflection angles. Fig. 144 shows the 
results of computations comparing 
experi­ mental data from Bowers 
(1959) for a control surface abaft a 
fixed structure with two values of 
balance to similar data from Harper and 
Simitses (1959) for an all-movable 
control surface, both sets of data being 
corrected to a common aspect ratio. 
Both sets of data were taken with the 
control surfaces  mounted  against a 
conical half-body of revolution in a 
wind tunnel. For both values of balance 
the lift developed is about 8 percent 
less than if there were no balance and 
no resulting gap.
  The favorable effect of a fixed 
structure ahead of a rudder shown by 
the  Bottomley  experiments  should be 
reflected in improved course keeping 
where the inflow angle to the fixed 
structure is essentially zero, Fig. 145(a 
). However, the inflow angle to the 
fixed structure in a steady turn can have 
a decidedly nonzero value as shown in 
Fig. 145(b). This angle of attack in 
turns will detract from the favorable 
coursekeeping effect of the fixed 
structure shown in Fig. 144, which 
applies only if  /3R    =  0.


CONTROLLABILITY	311
RUDDER NUMBER 5	40 PERCENT FLAP	19 PERCENT BALANCE	RUDDER NUMBER 5 40 PERCENT FLAP 19 PERCENT BALANCE
1.800	1.200



1.800

1.400

1.200

1.000

0.800

..1   0.800
0


t'	,
;yt'15
rf! \ 
10
vj, 
s10·
' I	! -5.




1.100


1.000


0.900


0.800

Q
0    0.700


!i: 0.400
w
§


ii
'VI


r· '
i-1,c_


!i:
.i.i.:




0.600


...._
.
0


0.2
00


 



  
  
 
V
,
V
J


.,
,l
:•11
!

 


8w 
0.
50
0


:::;  -0.200 ,	e,
 


:!i 0.400



-0.400

-0.600

-0.800

-1.000

-1.200


-. =.:•
 
 

 


 

0.300


0.200


0.100

 


ANGLE OF ATTACK o::


FLAP ANGLE


 
ANGLE OF ATTACK ex










0.150



RUDDE
R 
NUMBE
R 5	40 PERCENT FLAP 19 PERCENT BALANCE




0.100



RUDDE
R 
NUMBE
R 5	40 PERCENT FLAP 19 PERCENT BALANCE





0.100

0.050 -.....



0.075



0.050


o.o    -.	"
:c	' ' '
 

 




r--._

 	 


"'	:uc

   	 	 



0.025


 
...  -0.050
w
8
!i: -0.100

 


I'-


'"
r
-
-
.


   



I&. 0.0
w
0u
Z -0.025


w
:E
IC -0.150	'
w


'\ ' "


'",


...


'\
'\.
' '	',


'--


w
:E
0
:E
IC -0.050
w



Q 
Q
-0.200

-0.250


"',-,

   


-' ....


'
"'\   "\

 	 

 



Q
 
Q
::,	.
IC  -0.075

-
0
.
1
0
0





-0.300


-0.350


I"--
.'



I'- \


'\
'


" '\


 





-0.125


-0.150



Fig. 148    Rudder  series  hydrodynamic data


312	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 18-Principal Hydrodynamic Characteristics of Rudder Series
(CJmu
%	%	(CJmax	{ 6 -	0	}	Co@	(CJmax	(CMF)max	(Co)min
Rudder	Flap	Balance	(CJmax	(a=	0)	Co CL=  0.6	(CJmax	(Co)min	(Co)min	(Pos. CJ	(a=	0)
1	20	0	1.40	0.47	0.07	0.47	0.013	108	-0.017	36
2	30	0	1.24	0.60	0.08	0.39	0.016	78	-0.042	38
3	30	39	1.18	0.29	0.11	0.58	0.018	66	-0.007	16
4	40	0	1.36	0.66	0.10	0.53	0.015	91	-0.080	44
5	40	19	1.63	0.69	0.09	0.69	0.016	102	-0.037	44
6	40	38	1.29	0.51	0.11	0.70	0.017	76	-0.010	30
7	50	0	1.35	0.70	0.11	0.54	0.017	80	-0.135	41
8	50	18	1.29	0.64	0.12	0.66	0.018	72	-0.067	35
9	50	36	1.26	0.61	0.13	0.93	0.020	63	-0.025	31
11	60	18	1.20	0.86	0.17	0.67	0.016	75	-0.105	54
12	60	36	1.17	0.76	0.18	0.83	0.025	47	-0.045	30
32	o.	0"	0.88	0	0.07	0.19	0.013	68	(-0.120)"
" Rudder 32 has no flap.



i---_soo


------- , 2 -- - ··---· -





---._,/


 	·--· - -:- :'•- --:-_"17' TT	
.	451	--::



­

Sec11on a-a


R
u
d
d
e
r
 
N
o
.
 
3



 -	
SKltOfl b·b



Rudder No 1




Fig. 149 
Dimensions of 
model rudders 
(all dimensions 
in mm)






 

Fig. 150 Cross flow at stem of ship when in a turn

 
Fig. 151 Development of negative inflow angle on skeg due to drift



  Kerwin, et al (1972) tested a series of 12 
flapped control surfaces in a water tunnel while 
varying the amount of flap area and balance. 
The outline for the rudder model tested is 
shown in Fig. 146.
  Principal hydrodynamic characteristics of 
the series are given in Table 18. Fig. 147 
illustrates typical prop­ erties and the 
achievement of 39.05-percent balance in the 
30-percent flapped rudder No. 3. The 
experiments were run at a Reynolds number 
of about 1.2 x 106 and there was no evidence 
that the results should not apply at much 
higher Reynolds numbers.
  Results typical of those presented for each 
rudder are shown in Fig. 148 for Rudder No. 
5. This rudder developed the greatest lift 
coefficient of those tested, nearly doubling 
the 0.88 maximum lift coefficient of


CONTROLLABILITY	313



i
0
::t /JOr
3
aV      50r I
I·r
30  1
O.l










CP, :.,.·-0-•0···0•··C­
.o--'O"
i - ·::::,(o.. :-- -.0--•0••·0•
\T· -----·--,-,,·,;
i	7
,'








60-

;o •

40 -

30 f'"
o.a r!
0.7

0.6 j.

o.s


_.	I
V    0.3  [
z
"" 0.2
8







I
/_,a
/' .d
/_,o·
C	, .
..
.-- 1/	la
a:/'	,0·










































I
-I 0.3



0
,     0.2:::
'	z
!I!


u 0.1 L


0.1   V8
C)
!






I
f  /JO
I
so L


.5	0	5	10	15	20	25	30
ANGLE Of ATTACK o, do9.
lo) SKEG ANGLE 13: 15.25°


CPs	.a'

J





-
5
	
0
	
	
1
0
	
I
S
	
W
	
2
5
	
3
0
	
J
S
 
A
N
G
L
E
 
O
f
 
A
T
T
A
C
K
 
o
,
 
d
o
g
.
l
b
l
    
S
K
E
G
  
A
N
G
L
E
   
3
:
 
-
1
0
.
2
5
°

 

I


:z:I	I	·o..-o,-'	l	f
V	L	CP,:	o··-a··•IY·r 1	0
a  '°	I	.
 	 


z  30
Q
< 20
0.8

0.7

Q.6


0.5

o.,

_. 0.3
u
z 0.2
0.1
u


 












,i"








,i:/









..a··..o--.'q.




]
0.3



0
0.2 V
;
B


"'
V

z
Q
<





.......
z
*I,!


0

-0.1


0.1 V
C
)
	
u
i
	
5




 
.5	0	5		10	15      W	25	30 35 
ANGLE Of ATTACK "' dog.
(c) SKEG ANGLE 13 • -5.21'
Fig. 152 (a to d) Lift, drag and center of pressure characteristics for skeg 
rudder No. 1 (Goodrich and Mallard, 1979)









-5	0	5	10      15	20      25	30	35
ANGLE  Of  ATTACK   "' deg.
(dl SKfG ANGLE l3 ° -0.25°


314	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


 	 


-5	0	10       15	20	25       30	35
ANGU Of ATTACK "' deg.


·5	0


10      15	20	25	30	35       ,o	•5
ANGU OF ATTACK a, do9


(el SKEG ANGLE (l ... 75°


lfi SKEG ANGU /3• ,.9_75°



Fig.  152    (cont) (e and f)





the parent unflapped Rudder No. 32. Columns headed 
CLmax/ CDmin and(Cz.,,.J/ CDm,. (a= 0) in Table 18indicate 
the relative drag penalty when the rudder is not in use 
for steering.
  The doubly all-movable rudder with even a small 
(unbalanced) flap has much larger maximum lift coef­ 
ficient than an all-movable rudder with no flap. In­ 
creasing the flap size to more than 20 percent has little 
influence on maximum lift. The lift increases are 
achieved at the expense of large increases in rudder 
hinge moments and somewhat increased drag. Flap 
hinge moments are, however, substantially less than 
the maximum rudder moments of the zero-flap rudder. 
Comparisons at fixed values of the lift coefficient, 
also tabulated by Kerwin et al (1972), indicate that the 
doubly all-movable rudder with a 20-percent flap has 
less drag than a zero-flap rudder at lift coefficients 
greater than 0.6, and comparable drag at lower lift 
coefficients. The disadvantages of the all-movable rud­ 
der are its increased hinge moments, mechanical com­
plexity, and possible maintenance difficulties.
  In practice, the fixed structure, if used, may be in­ 
volves either a faired sternpost, a horn (whether full


depth as in Fig. 143(a) or partial depth as  in  Fig. 
143(b) ), or even the deadwood or skeg of the ship itself. 
In the latter case, the movable-rudder area is small 
indeed compared to that  of  the fixed structure  ahead 
of it. From a hydrodynamic point of view the perform­ 
ance of such a rudder can be predicted only  if  the 
entire ship ahead of the rudder is treated as the fixed 
portion of the rudder. This mode of treatment would 
apply both to experimental testing with models and to 
analytical prediction of rudder performance by theory. 
In the analytical approach the really important param­ 
eters would be the ratio of the chord length of the 
movable rudder to the length of the ship, the  aspect 
ratio of the movable part of the rudder, and the aspect 
ratio of the ship as a whole, that is, its draft-to-length 
ratio. Such a rudder would develop  far  more  lift  on 
the ship as a whole in the ahead condition than would 
an isolated rudder of identical area. In the astern con­ 
dition, however, such a rudder would be only a small 
flap on the leading edge of the ship and as such would 
be almost completely ineffective in turning the  ship 
(see articles 37.10 and 37.11 of Saunders (1957)). An 
important variety of rudder in common use on many


 




ships is a rudder equipped with a partial depth fixed 
horn, such as the semibalanced rudder in Fig. 143(b). 
This rudder incorporates balance area without intro- 
ducing a gap when the rudder is laid over. However, 
this type of rudder necessarily incorporates a horizon- 
tal break between the top of the balance area and the 
lower side of the fixed portion, and this break has 
unfavorable influence on its characteristics.
  Free-stream wind tunnel experiments on semibal- 
anced skeg rudders were presented by Goodrich and 
Molland (1979). Tests were performed on three rud- 
ders having differing taper ratios of 0.59, 0.80, and 
1.00, each rudder with a skeg and with NACA 0020 
sections. Overall characteristics are typical of the rud- 
ders fitted to many ships, and are shown in Fig. 149. 
One of the variables in the tests was drift angle at



the rudder from cross flow at the stern of the ship in 
turning, as diagramed in Fig. 150. The effective influ- 
ence of the drift angle on the all-movable rudder is 
simply to increase its angle of attack. In  the  case  of 
the skeg rudder, it also leads to inflow angles on the 
skeg as shown in Fig. 151. Alternatively, if the rudder 
is shifted while the ship is in a turn,  a  positive  angle 
of attack is developed by the skeg, which assists the 
desired motion. Skeg test angles of ± 15 degrees were 
used to represent realistic limits of drift angle at the 
rudder.  Results  for rudder  No.1  are presented  in 
Fig.
152. The discontinuities in the lift and drag curves are 
presumably due to early separation downstream of the 
skeg, and this was confirmed by the visual 
flowstudies. While this separation on the skeg starts at 
relatively low rudder angles, separation on the all-
movable part


316	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


does   not   start    until   somewhat   higher angles   are		however, is delayed by about 12 degrees, and the max- 
reached.		imum lift coefficient achieved is only 10 percent  less. 
A general  finding for  aircraft  flaps is that gaps pre-	For the same lift the skeg rudder does have a much 
cipitate  stalling  of the flap. Fig. 153 shows results  for		higher drag. For zero and negative skeg angles the 
various  sealing  of  vertical  gaps  in  rudders.  In each		maximum lift coefficientdeveloped by the skeg rudder 
case, the  lift developed with either  the high or the low		is a little less than for the all-movable rudder. A re- 
pressure   side of the  gap  sealed  is only slightly lower		versal of the rudder while the ship is in a turn, how- 
than  with  all gaps  sealed, but  is much higher than forever,	results in the adding of the  angles  and a higher 
all gaps open.		maximum lift coefficientproduced by the skeg rudder.
  As shown in Fig. 154, the rudder-plus-skeg  combi-  The  differences  among  the  three  skeg  rudders  of 
nation has less lift increase for increasing angles  of  Fig. 149 as tested  were not large.  Increasing  the taper 
attack than has the all-movablerudder. The stall angle, ratio improved the lift at the larger angles of attack.


Section 15
Maneuvering Trials and Performance Requirements
   15.1    Introdudion.   Every   ship  must  have at  least	position is reversed. Although a small steady-turning 
some inherent  control qualities  that  enable it to main-	diameter (Section 6) may be an indication of good ma- 
tain  its intended  course in the  open sea,  to maneuver	neuverability, it does not define a ship's ability to make 
safely  in ports  and  restricted  waterways,  and to stop	the short and frequent transient course changes that 
within  a reasonable  distance. These minimum capabil-	are so often required in restricted channels.
ities are  needed under all conditions of loading, at both			Finally, a ship's ability to stop reliably, particularly 
high  speeds  and the  moderate  speeds associated with		in an emergency, is obviously desirable. However, it 
restricted   water,  and in wind and waves  as  well as in		is difficult to specify what is a "reasonable" or safe 
calms.		distance for stopping, except to match usual practice. 
With reference  to the material introduced in Sections	In unrestricted water, turning is often a better way
4 and 5, good coursekeeping  means  ability to maintain   to  avoid  trouble  than  attempting   to  stop.  A  rudder 
a steady course or heading without excessive .rudder cycling maneuver in which the  rudder  is  alternated 
activity, whether in manual or automatic control, par- between left and right (see section 10.5) may also be 
ticularly under adverse weather  conditions.  Continu-  more  effective in slowing  a vessel  than  the  reversing 
ous helm corrections lead to unnecessary wear and of engines in restricted waterways.
tear  on steering  gear,  add to hull drag, and may create		15.2     Controllability	Performance	Require- 
an  undesirable   and  potentially  dangerous work load	ments. Although the desirable qualities  of  controlla- 
for  the  helmsman  in restricted  waters  where the risk	bility  are   well   known,   it   is   difficult   to   specify 
is  greatest.   Dynamic  stability  is  a  desirable but  not	adequately the required or minimum coursekeeping 
always a necessary  ship characteristic  for good course-	and maneuvering capabilities. Still, as discussed in Sec- 
keeping.  The requirement  varies  according to a ship's	tions 4 through 6, certain guidelines have been avail- 
geometry,  size, and speed. This relationship  has much	able to aid  the  designer,  and  several  definitive  trial 
to do with  the relative  reaction  times of ship and con-	maneuvers have been adopted to various extents. 
trollers.   For  example,  the   heading  of  a  very  large	Sometimes the criteria may be qualitative and require 
tanker   at   slow  speed  tends   to  change quite  slowly	only that the ship be able to hold course without ex- 
because  of  the  ship's  great  inertia  and slow forward	cessive attention to the helm, and that the ship have 
speed.  The  tanker   can,  therefore, tolerate  moderate	turning and stopping ability comparable to  that  of 
levels  of  dynamic  instability,  because  it will diverge	other ships of like size and type.
course  only slightly in the time required for corrective			For most conventional displacement ships some 
rudder  action. This response is consistent with the slow		quantitative performance criteria are required. The 
reaction   times   of   rudder   and  steering   machinery,		most frequently specified criterion is the maximum 
equipments  which are massive and not highly powered		allowable tactical diameter in a full-rudder turn. Some- 
in large  vessels.  Conversely,  a  small,  fast vessel like		times,  allowable head reach  in a crash  stop from  full  
a high-speed patrol  boat  cannot tolerate  much, if any,		speed is specified, and other performance criteria (de- 
instability.						scribed subsequently) are used, especially for high- 
Maneuverability	requires	reliable	and	prompt	speed merchant and naval vessels, and for submarines. 
changes  of heading  on demand, which implies predict-		Other concerns are the  potential  danger  associated 
able  turning   response  to  rudder   movement and cor-		with machinery malfunctions, and the need to dem- 
respondingly  prompt checking of the turn when rudder		onstrate ability for timely recovery from an emer-


CONTROLLABILITY	317




 



gency. A typical emergency to be anticipated is sudden 
and unplanned excursion of the rudder ·hard over, or 
other failure of the steering gear system such as that 
which caused the catastrophic 1972 Seawitch collision 
and fire in New York Harbor.
  Fortunately the problem of quantifying criteria for 
acceptable controllability has been clarified in recent 
years by application of the analyses, model tests, full- 
scale trials, and computer simulations described in the 
previous sections. Work by groups such as the U.S. 
Coast Guard, International Maritime Organization 
(IMO), and SNAME Panel H-10 (Ship Controllability) 
has led to tentative national  and international  criteria 
as summarized by Panel H-10 (1975) and  Landsburg, 
et al (1983). Such developments are discussed in this 
section, first for conventional displacement ships and 
then for high-speed craft.
   15.3	Maneuvering      Trial      Code.       and       Guide- 
line •. Ship controllability  continues  to  be  evaluated 
by means of full-scale trials and analyses, involving 
either a few definitive maneuvers or a complete set of 
tests. Ideally, this assessment of adequacy should be 
based on numerical measures or indexes that are de- 
rived from these maneuvers and those that can be 
calculated during design.
  At least four authoritative organizations have de- 
veloped maneuvering trials codes, but these codes do 
not agree in details. Table 19 shows the proposed cov- 
erage of maneuvering trials codes of British Maritime



Technology (BMT), SNAME, Det norske Veritas 
(DnV), and the International Towing Tank 
Conference (ITl'C). All four organizations agree on 
the need to conduct three specifictypes of maneuvers, 
and so these three are included in a great many trials:
(a)	Turning maneuver from full speed.
(b)	Zigzag or Z-maneuver.
(c)	Crash stop from full ahead speed.
Two or three organizations also agree on the need to 
conduct three additional trials:
(d)	Direct or reversed spiral tests.
(e)	Pullout (from turn).
if) Turning maneuver at low speed.
With the purpose of developing an approach to deter- 
mining a ship's trials program, Glansdorp (1976) pro- 
vided a very instructive survey of the various  trials, 
and rated their general value for  scientific, nautical, 
and experience-gained purposes. He has also 
developed a general rating system with weighting 
factors for use in deciding which trials would be 
useful to run for various types and sizes of vessels, 
with concern given to their intended cargo, voyage 
itinerary, and environ- ment.
  In 1985 as a preliminary action to enable the 
collec- tion of standardized data and the development 
of cri- teria	and   minimum   
standards,	the
	International Maritime Organization (IMO) 
published MSC/Circ. 389, "Interim Guidelines for 
Estimating Maneuvering Performance in Ship 
Design." These guidelines pro- vide that the 
maneuvering performance of  all  new ships of 100 
meters in length and over, are to be es- timated, 
tested, and verified. The guidelines state that all ships 
should have maneuvering qualities which per- mit 
them to keep course, to turn, to check turns, to operate 
at  acceptably  slow speeds  and  to  stop,  all in a 
satisfactory manner. Definitive trials were specified 
and the following characteristics were called out for 
estimation and verification for both fully loaded and 
trial conditions:
  (a)	Turning circle characteristics. These can be 
determined from the turning circle tests using a 
rudder angle of 35 degrees.
  (b)	Yaw checking ability. This can be determined 
by the first overshoot angle and the time to check the 
yaw in a zigzag maneuver.
  (c)	Initial  turning  ability.  This  can  be  deter- 
mined at the beginning of the zigzag maneuver from 
the change of ship's heading angle per unit  rudder 
angle and the distances traveled ahead and to the side 
after a rudder command is executed.
  (d)	Coursekeeping ability. While no single mea- 
sure of coursekeeping ability has yet been developed, 
this quality may be evaluated for ships of comparable 
type, size, and speed by comparison of Z-maneuver, 
direct or reverse spiral,  and pullout (from  turn)  tests. 
If the ship is expected to be dynamically unstable, the 
degree of human (or automatic) control needed to 
steer the ship should be considered in the design 
stage. Con-


318	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 

sideration should also be given during design to the 
neutral rudder angle necessary for proceeding on a 
straight course.
  (e)	Slow steaming  ability.  The ability to proceed 
at steady slow speed is a desirable quality. It is usually 
determined only from the ship's speed associated with 
the lowest possible engine RPM.
  (f)	Stopping ability.  This  can  be  determined 
from the distance the ship travels along its track  once  
a crash-astern order is given. Turning while stopping 
from higher speeds is also of concern, and should be 
measured and recorded.
  The adoption of such a code will be welcomed by 
ship designers both as a guide to the specification of 
trials and as a future source of statistical performance 
data.
  15.4	Basic Trial Considerations.	Although the in- 
dexes from the definitive maneuvers may offer suitable 
measures to use in developing criteria and  standards 
for different ships, they give little information on how 
much space a ship requires. Figs. 155, 156, and 157 
show the turning circle, zigzag, and stopping maneu- 
vers with the ship outline plotted. This swept path


presentation is most useful for ship 
handlers when estimating potential 
clearance with respect to water- ways, other 
vessels, obstructions, etc.
  In developing standards, the relationships 
between swept path and movement  of a 
reference  point must be appreciated. For 
example, a tanker has a small turning circle 
relative to its length, but it requires 
substantially more turning area than 
indicated by the path of its reference point. 
This requirement for  greater area is due to 
the tanker's  great  length  and drift angle, 
which together  cause the tanker  to sweep  
a considerably larger swath of water area 
when turn- ing than when going straight 
ahead.
  Nevertheless, statistical analyses of 
results of swept path extremities may not 
show smooth functions of control settings 
or ship design parameters. For this reason, 
the traditional measures using the measured 
path of the ship's center-of-gravity or 
midships ref- erence point are used for 
comparative purposes, and they provide 
useful information when related to the ship 
type and size.
  Different parameters have been used in 
the definitive maneuvers for various 
purposes. In the turning ma- neuver, 
maximum rudder angle capability is some- 
times greater  than  the  35 degrees  
required.  While it is helpful to know 
turning characteristics at the max- imum 
angle, characteristics at 35 degrees provide 
con- sistent	parameters	for	comparison.	Similarly, variations in the zigzag maneuver have proved useful. The alternate 10 - 10 zigzag and other variants (20- degree rudder, 10-degree change of heading, for ex- ample) are sometimes used; either to keep the maneu- ver in the  hydrodynamically linear range,  or to enable a free-
running model test to take place between the 
walls of a straight-line towing tank. A 
variation using only 5-degree rudder angles 
and I-degree course changes has also been 
suggested and tried by simu- lation. 
However, as a ship trial this may be 
impractical because of the difficulty in 
achieving sufficiently pre- cise settings. The 
20 - 20 zigzag maneuver is generally 
preferred because:
  •	It has been used for many years, so 
that a con- siderable body of statistical data 
now exists.
  •	Ship handlers often use 20 degrees of 
rudder when initiating and checking turns.
  •	With some ships, 10 degrees of rudder 
may not suffice for checking turns; that is, 
no data will be ob- tained.
  •	Inexact setting of the rudder angle in 
a trial is  less harmful in a 20-20 than in a 
10-10degree zigzag maneuver.
  The crash stop maneuver is a good test  
for  trying out extremes for the machinery 
and as an index to relative stopping ability. 
For ship handlers' informa- tion, a stopping 
trial from a more likely maneuvering speed 
would be more useful.  That  speed  
depends  on a ship's size and power. For 
traditional "full ahead" maneuvering the 
engine order corresponding to about


CONTROLLABILITY	319

12 knots  may be reasonable for  bulk carriers and 16		Except for tankers, ore-bulk-oilcarriers, and other 
knots for higher  speed cargo vessels.		vessels with large tankage it is generally impractical 
The direct or reversed  spiral test  has  not been tra-	to ballast to summer full-load draft before delivery 
ditionally specified. It  does not provide a  test of the		from the construction yard. Therefore, some other 
machinery extremes can require significanttrials time.		standard draft is needed. For containerships and other 
The data gathered, however,are criticalto determining		ship types with relatively light draft and high free- 
the  controls-fixeddynamic stability of the ship.		board, trials should be conducted at a draft where the 
Practical  considerations usually limit maneuvering	greatest maneuvering problems are experienced. It 
trials  to the  fewest  number that  can reliably show a		may be necessary instead, however, to compare trial 
ship to  have adequate controllability.		performance at  light  draft  with that  of similar ships
Maneuvering trials  for oil tankers  should be made	of known merit.
at  summer full load draft.  Experience and trial data		The most demanding maneuvering requirements for 
show that  maneuvering  and  coursekeeping at other	many ships are those for operations in shallow water 
drafts  is generally  superior. This is because trim by	during coastal and port navigation. The practical dif- 
the  stern  and reduced mass in lighter operating con-	ficulties of finding a broad testing area of nearly con- 
ditions result in greater dynamic stability and quicker	stant shallowdepth are usually insuperable. Shiptrials 
response. These conclusionsmay not be true in strong	are thus usually run in deep water. Therefore, the 
wind,  but  such  conditions are  not  covered in basic	adequacy of a ship's maneuvering capabilityin shallow 
trials.	water must usually be inferred from its success in
  For  uniformity  in  selecting ballast drafts,  consid-	deep water and its capabilitiesrelative to other known 
eration  should be  given drafts  specified by the  IMO	vessels. The full scale trials  of the  278,OOo-dwEtS80 
1973 Marine Pollution Convention(MARPOL).	Osaka  in shallow water  as reported by Crane (1979)






320	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 



provide valuable data on the prediction of tanker ca- 
pabilities in shallow water.
  15.5	Relating      Controllability       Indexes       to 
Tests. Basic performance criteria for ship controlla- 
bility together with the appropriate tests for  evalu- 
ating each criteria are summarized in Table 20. 
Coursekeeping ability depends on the ship's dynamic 
stability, its rudder effectiveness in turning its control 
system characteristics, and its size and speed. Thus, 
coursekeeping ability is not indicated directly by any 
one definitive trial. However, a ship's dynamic stability 
can be directly demonstrated by the pullout or spiral 
test, as discussed previously.
  The zigzag maneuver is the traditional maneuvering 
trial that provides the greatest amount of directly use- 
ful information on the combined effect of hull form 
parameters (including draft and trim), rudder per- 
formance, and control system. Yaw-checking ability, 
which is important for both coursekeeping and ma- 
neuvering, is indicated directly by the first overshoot 
angle a. and by the time to check yaw, t. (See Figs. 
156and 18).Although the test does not indicate course- 
keeping capability directly, the Nomoto-Norrbin pa- 
rameter T' which is indicative of dynamic stability can 
be calculated from the zigzag  maneuver,  along  with 
K' which is indicative of turning ability. As discussed 
in Section 5.4, the K' and T' parameters  should  be 
used as rough comparative measures because of their


linear development. The ratio of K' IT' is an 
indicator of overall controllability.
  A ship's turning ability is indicated  in 
general  by  the characteristics of the simple 
turning circle (ad- vance, transfer, and tactical 
diameter). However, most maneuvers involve 
only transient phases of turning. Hence, 
quantities such as quickness of initiating a turn 
may be more important for maneuvering in 
waterways than the overall turning  circle 
dimensions. Quickness of response is indicated 
in the zigzag maneuver by the time, ta, required 
for the ship's heading  to reach  the first rudder 
shift angle (20 deg in Fig. 156). Similarly, 
yaw-checking ability is directly signified by 
the  time  to check yaw, t., and indirectly by 
the overshoot angle magnitudes (mainly the 
first yaw  overshoot  angle au as noted above).
  Ship motions during large maneuvers 
cannot be de- scribed accurately by linear 
functions; hence values of K' and T' are not 
constant but are functions of am- plitudes of 
motion. Therefore, it is essential to estimate 
the values of both of these indexes for the 
same OJr erating conditions.
  Stopping capability, head reach, and lateral 
deviation in stopping are easy to measure, but 
are  much harder to improve after construction, 
even with significant changes in propulsion 
power. In practice, ample stoJr ping capability 
is achieved by the operator's careful 
management of ship speed.
  15.6	Status on Development of Minimum 
Inherent Controllability    Standards.	In 
response to "The Presi- dential Initiative to 
Reduce Maritime Oil Pollution of March 
1977," the U.S. Coast Guard began an 
intensive evaluation of means for improving 
the maneuvering and stopping ability of large 
tankers (Card, Cojeen, et aI1979). Their main 
conclusion was that all vessels of more than 
1,000 gross tons intended for the normal 
transport of cargo or passengers should meet 
reason- able minimal standards of 
maneuvering  performance in normal turns, 
crash stops, and zigzag maneuvers. They also 
concluded that minimum continuous maneu- 
vering speed capability and the controllability 
of ships with high freeboard in wind are 
worthy of standards development, although 
controllability in wind is more difficult to set 
and to predict during design.
  At the same time, SNAME Panel H-10 
(Ship Con- trollability) addressed the  subject,  
including  aspects of piloted controllability in 
Crane, et al (1975), Lands- burg, et al  (1978), 
Notes,  (1983), and  Landsburg,  et al (1983). 
As previously noted, the IMO is working on 
international standards, having already 
provided ma- neuvering test guidelines and 
recommendations.
  The U.S. Coast Guard approach assumes that 
most oceangoing ships do perform adequately 
in the  hands of trained and experienced 
shiphandlers. Nonetheless, even poor 
performers should not be tolerated. ShiJr 
handlers should not have to stretch their 
"windows of adaptability" to accommodate 
unnecessarily poor-per- forming vessels.


CONTROLLABILITY	321


7
-""it
-.0..	6
IwC
ti	5
==
Q
.,J
c(
()




.,J	3
zc(
0;;
z
w	2
Q==
z
0z



 







50
	10
0
	15
0	200	250	300	350	400	450	500

D
l
 
P
L
A
C
E
M
E
N
T
 
(
I
N
 
1
0
0
0
 
M
E
T
R
I
C
 
T
O
N
S
)
Fig. 
158    
Tactica
l  
diamet
er data 
and  
analysi
s for 
all 
ships 
(Barr, 
1981)









::c:
(.)

a:
W< O.
:cm
..I   ..I



2.5  
.......
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-


2


1.5


><
u..


o---
:r18
a:   -
w
:i
Q
z
0z






0.5





50	100	150	200	250	300	350	400	450	500
DISPLACEMENT (IN 1000 METRIC TONS)
Fig. 159 Stopping head reach data and analysis far all ships (Barr, 1981)


322


 







  At the outset of its work, the USCG established a 
data base of performance measures for various ships 
(Barr, et aI1981). Values of the various controllability 
indexes were collected from trade journals and pub- 
lications, shipowners, shipyards, and IMO reports. 
Tankers are by far the largest group of  ships  in the 
data base, followed by other bulk carriers. Few other 
ship types are found. In Barr, et al (1981), ships are 
identified only by ship number, because some of the 
data are proprietary. A complete discussion of the 
USCG data base and the approach to analyses is also 
given. Although the data base is limited, the maneu- 
vering responses are useful as guides to levels of per- 
formance for the general ship classes.
  To illustrate the variability of the results, four plots 
are presented showing:
  •	Non-dimensional ratio of tactical diameter to 
length, plotted against displacement, for 35-degree 
rudder turns (Fig. 158). Note that this ratio is roughly 
proportional to 1I K' (Equation 77).
  •	Head reach divided by the product of ship length 
times Froude number, plotted against  displacement, 
for crash stop (Fig. 159).
  •	Ratio of overshoot angle to rudder angle, plotted 
against block coefficient, for 20-20 zigzag maneuvers 
(Fig. 160).
  •	Relationship of steering quality indices, T'  and 
K' (Fig. 161).
  Figs. 158 through 160 illustrate  the  variability  of 
the data. Shown are the data points, mean curves, and 
standard deviation of the mean. Fig. 161shows a some- 
what similar array of data, but with the upper  and 
lower curves set at 1.25 times the mean and 0.75 times 
the mean. One approach to setting standards might be 
to assign ratings ranging from superior to marginal.



Rating curves parallelling the mean curve could be developed 
from statistically assessments of certain vessels that were 
commonly referred to as being par- ticularly good or bad.
  The scatter of data for overshoot angle in Fig. 160 makes 
performance ratings based on such data highly suspect. 
Nomoto (1966) has shown, as pointed out in Section 5.4, that 
overshoot angle is nearly proportional to K' IT' with rudder 
angle 8R fixed. Fig. 161 confirms his suggestion that the 
parameters K' and T' probably provide a more useful basis for 
analyzing results of zigzag maneuvers than does overshoot 
angle. Param- eters K', T', and rudder area, AR' are related  as 
shown in Fig. 162. This relationship may also be useful as a 
design tool in selecting rudder area. Fig. 162 indicates that 
K'-T' data available for ships in the USCG data base are 
generally in good agreement with data from other sources.
  15.7	Submarines and  Submersibles.  Submarines and 
submersibles must have adequate depth keeping and vertical 
plane maneuvering ability, in addition to stopping, 
coursekeeping and horizontal plane maneu- vering ability. 
Fig. 163 shows some of the design con- siderations. Stern 
diving planes provide major control forces and moments in 
the vertical plane. For addi- tional control, forward fairwater 
or bow planes are often installed. When the submarine 
operates close to the ocean surface or ocean floor, forces of 
attraction come into play that are similar to those that cause 
surface ship bank effects.
  The height of the fairwater (sail) is an important design 
element. First, the problem to settle is how high should the 
periscope sight line be above mean wave height. After that, 
the taller the sail the less the dis- turbing force on the hull. 
However, a tall sail has large


324





















drag and induces larger snap roll when the submarine 
turns. A large snap roll can be highly undesirable for 
submarine maneuvers and depthkeeping. A snap roll 
occurs when the transverse velocity from yawing in a 
turn combines vectorially with the fore-and-aft velocity 
to create a lift  force  on the  fairwater,  t:tlUSproducing 
a rolling moment. The snap roll also affects submarine 
depth, because with the submarine at a heel angle, the 
rudder acts as a diving plane. The diving planes sim- 
ilarly provide a partial yawing effect.
  

The vertical overshoot maneuver, is much 
like a zig- zag maneuver but is terminated after 
the first over- shoot (Fig. 164).The maneuver 
is similar to that in the horizontal plane except 
that a submerged submarine also has some 
metacentric stability. For the vertical 
overshoot maneuver, the maximum depth 
change is analagous to about one-half the 
swept path in a hor- izontal zigzag maneuver. 
This depth change and the pitch overshoot 
angle are important measures of the 
submarine's controllability and safety.









 


CONTROLLABILITY	325


  The meander maneuver provides a measure of how  occurs  during  turning  of a  hydrofoil  craft.  No quan- 
well the submarine's depth stabilizes following exe- titative criteria exists in this area.
cution  of  a  depth-changing  maneuver.  The depth ov-		15.9	Piloted Controllability. Little mention has yet 
ershoot   distance,   and   time   required   for  depth  to	been made in this section of performance in real op- 
become constant,  provide a measure  of depth checking	erating circumstances. The emphasis has been on pro- 
ability.  In  the  meander  as  well  as  in  the  overshoot	viding	a	hull	with	good	basic	coursekeeping 
maneuver,  metacentric  stability helps to maintain level	characteristics. Many additional factors also affect nav- 
flight,  particularly  at low speeds.	igational safety. Expected traffic situations, environ-
  Ability to recover from a stern plane jam, without mental conditions (primarily wind, current, waves, and 
exceeding allowable maximum operating depth, is cru- visibility), vessel-waterway  geometry,  the  placement 
cial. The submarine should be able to recover from  a  of navigational  aids, and, of course, human variability  
stern plane jam that occurs at a typical operating speed have profound  influences on what  amount  of controll- 
and depth. The maneuver is complex because it may ability is prudent for a given design. The most  impor- 
include control of propellers, rudders, bow planes, and tant element of ship control is the human controller, 
ballasting system. For this reason, stern plane jam who must be considered seriously during  ship design  
recoveries are usually investigated through mathe- and operations.
matical  simulations  as  shown,  for  example,  by Gid-		Panel H-10 (Ship Controllability) of SNAME (1975) 
dings  and Louis (1966).	proposed a "Design, or ABC harbor" as a standard
  For these reasons, requirements for submarine con-  scenario approach for  examining the combined effects  
troll ability are not only more extensive but also gen- of ship design and piloting  factors  in realistic  water-  
erally more stringent than those for surface ship way settings. An ABC harbor can incorporate many 
controllability.	of the critical components of a variety of real world
  15.8	High-Speed  Vessels.  High-speed  ships  usu-   ports  where the  particular  ship is to be handled. Study 
ally experience large roll motions or heel in turns. This of the  ship's ability to transit  the ABC harbor  through 
roll or heel is of particular concern because in extreme simulations using the controllability characteristics of  
cases it can lead to roll instability and capsizing. There-  the  vessel  design  in  "fast-time"  or  "manned  real- 
fore, high-speed vessels  usually  roll into a turn.  That  time"  situations  can then  show  acceptability  of  oper- 
is, they heel toward the center of a turn to assure roll ations (Section 16.9).
stability  and  keep  the  resultant  forces perpendicular			Reviewing the  various  interactions  further,  Veld- 
to the deck.		huyzen and Strassen (1977) and GIansdorp (1977) have 
Controllability  can  be  adequately characterized  by	schematically traced the main interactions among ship, 
the  same  four  basic  maneuvers   as  used for  conven-		environment, and human controller in a manner similar
tional  ships, that  is, the  turn,  spiral, zigzag, and crash		to that illustrated in Fig. 165. We may conclude that 
stop.  Because  performance  is so sensitive  to speed, it		a shiphandler's  functions  may  be  separated  into an 
is  desirable  to  conduct  turns,  spirals,  and zigzags at		estimator, an internal prediction model, and a decision- 
several   speeds.  In  the   case  of  hydrofoil  craft, it is		making element. This division of functions provides a 
important   to  characterize   controllability  in both  the		framework for studying  and understanding  human hull  
and foil-borne modes.		control in shiphandling simulations. However, it does 
Hydrofoil  craft  and surface  effect vessels have spe-	not provide information on mean response or the var- 
cialized  control  requirements.   These  vessels are  not		iability of human functions which are best studied by 
displacement   type   ships   in  their underway  modes.		using a research shiphandling simulator (as described
Rather,  the  hull  of  a  hydrofoil  craft  is supported  by	in Section 16.9).
dynamic lift from its  submerged  hydrofoils  and a sur-			A maneuvering emergency is an urgent immediate 
face  effect  vessel  is  supported  by  an  air cushion re-		need for control action. In such a case, a pilot would 
strained  by  fixed and/or  flexible walls or skirts.		prefer  to  have  the  ability  to  turn  or stop  instantly. 
A fundamental   control  problem  for hydrofoil craft	These preferences are unrealistic, as are many other 
concerns vertical plane operations  in waves. A decision		arbitrary suggestions for large  increases in inherent has  
to  be  made  whether   the  craft   is  to  follow the		controllability for use only in emergencies. Even if 
contour  of waves  or try  to fly level through them, and		they could be provided and were provided, shiphan- 
whether  active lift control or passive  (ladder foils) will		dlers might be tempted to take  greater  risks, and still 
be used.  Hydrofoil craft  with automatically controlled		be unprepared to use the extra  forces. The correct 
foils  can  generally  operate  in  rougher   seas than the		alternative is to provide a good design and properly 
area-stabilized  type.  Loss  of  height  or hull clearance		train the operator so that he knows the ship's capa-
during  maneuvering  is another  problem  unique to hy-	bilities and will exercise prudence.
drofoil  craft.  Loss  of foil lift  during  turning can lead		Miller, et al (1981) considered various types of ma- 
to  undesirable  turning   characteristics   or, in extreme	neuvering emergencies extracted from U.S. Coast 
cases,  to hull impact. It  is important  to  insure that no	Guard casualty reports. Crane (1973) demonstrated 
significant  loss  of  hull  clearance  or  change  of trim	the relative benefits of alternate control equipment and


 	 




actions in possible emergencies of large tankers. Other 
studies by Clarke (1971) have shown similar results.
  For lack of data, emergency maneuvering require- 
ments are difficult to analyze realistically. A large va- 
riety of singular emergencies can be speculated upon, 
and these will vary from port to port. System safety 
studies, however, can be performed on a port-specific 
basis. Attempting to do so is discussed by Crane 
(1983), and Grose (1980).
  Conventional maneuvering trial indexes are gener- 
ally not useful for rating piloted controllability per- 
formance in realistic waterways. Several additional 
indexes have been developed  for  statistical  analyses 
of channel navigation. Included are the" clearance dis- 
tance," "safe speed margin," and "rudder use"  in-  
dexes suggested by Panel H-10 (1975), and a channel 
based grid system for ranking track-keeping perform- 
ance described by Keith, et al (1977). Similar criteria 
are regularly used at the Computer Aided Operations 
Research Facility (CAORF) and other shiphandling 
simulation research facilities.
  Among the thousands of existing  research  studies 
on ship control, few relate ship control design param- 
eters to performance in real waterways. Some excep- 
tions are discussed here. Atkins and Gaffney (1980) 
describe a shiphandling simulator investigation of a



proposed increase in maximum ship size for an 
existing "tight but manageable" port. In  this  
study,  harbor pilots accustomed to the particular 
port piloted the simulated ships. The buoys, 
lighted ranges, and other visual cues were 
simulated, and water current velocity was varied 
between runs. This type of study is now common 
for analyzing port approaches or modifica- tions. 
Only recently have applications to specific ship 
design characteristics been undertaken. In one 
CAORF research project (Aranow, 1983),the size 
of a tanker's rudder was halved to determine the 
extent to which experienced pilots could adapt 
and compensate for this drastic reduction of 
inherent controllability. The find- ing was that, by 
using larger rudder angles and more anticipation, 
the expected reduction in performance did not 
occur. Of course, the maneuvering margins de- 
creased somewhat and the pilot's stress  level  
must have increased greatly.
  A study of optimum spacing and configurations 
of buoy placements was made for the U.S. Coast 
Guard (Bertsche, 1982).This study assigned 
relative risk fac- tors to channels according to 
configurations of turns, channel widths, ship size, 
currents, buoy placement, and visibility. Although 
not intended for assessing ship design changes, 
the study may prove useful in that application.


CONTROLLABILITY	327
Section 16 
Application to Design


  16.1	Controllability in the Ship Design Spiral. As 
stricter performance standards are developed and 
greater emphasis is placed on having a ship that ma­ 
neuvers well, it becomes increasingly important to pay 
attention to controllability throughout design. Tradi­ 
tionally, analysis of controllability has been performed 
late in a design, to check acceptability. Controllability 
now, however, has become an important item in the 
ship design spiral, requiring analysis and review  at 
each successive stage (Landsburg, et al 1983). This 
section reviews procedures and analysis tools that can 
be used at various stages of design to help ensure 
development of an adequately controllable vessel. Sec­ 
tion 17 will provide further information on design  of 
the rudder and other control surfaces, and on the ap­ 
plication of auxiliary maneuvering devices. The intro­ 
duction to control systems given in Section 9 also needs 
to be conscientiously applied in developing a good de­ 
sign.
  Clarke (1987) put the design process into perspective 
as shown in Fig. 166. As noted in Section 5.4, the more 
maneuverable ships have lower T' and higher K' val­ 
ues, with tankers tending to be found in the upper


right part of the  scatter  diagram,  and  cargo  vessels 
in the lower left (see also Section 15.6). Clarke has 
used systematic experimental data from the Technical 
Research Center of Finland (1984) to show the trends
caused by C8 B/ L and ARI LT (AR = rudder area). 
The figure shows that the "obesity" coefficient, C8 
BI L, is
responsible for most of the diagonal spread of the 
data, whereas the relative rudder area, AR/LT, causes 
little shift by comparison. (This obesity coefficient 
should not be confused with the volumetric 
coefficients, also known as fatness ratio, which is 
defined as V / (L/10)3 see Section 3.2 of Vol I).
  The major controllability criterion to be considered, 
even at the earliest design stage when selecting basic 
dimensions, is thus the measure of dynamic course 
stability, o-1• To emphasize the effect of dynamic sta­ 
bility on vessel performance, an example of three ves­ 
sels is taken from Eda (1983). Characteristics of the 
three hulls are given in Table 21, and their steady 
turning rates are plotted against rudder angles in Fig.
167. Basic concepts relating to controllability were in­ 
troduced in Sections 3 and 4.
Digital simulations were performed for these 
three





40








10





K'











0.2
0.2	T'	10	40
Fig. 166 Nomoto K' and T' far tankers and cargo ships (Clarke, 1987)


328	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 Design 
Stability 
Hull Form
LBP/B 
LBPIT 
BIT
Ca
C
LCG fwd 00/LBP 
Ai/LBPx T


Table 21-Principal Model Particulars
A	B
   Stable		Unstable 
Slender, Fine	Wide, 
Full
6.95	5
19.56	16.2
2.81	3.24
0.613	0.820
0.625	0.823
-0.015	0.026
0.022	0.019



B
Very 
Unstable 
Very Wide, 
Full
4
16.2
4.
03
0.
8
1
0
0.
8
1
3
0.
0
1
9
0.
0
2
1






ships to examine the effect of various degrees of in­ 
herent course stability on ship maneuvering perform­ 
ance. The analyses are based on the hydrodynamic data 
of yaw moment and lateral force that were obtained 
in a series of captive model tests on a rotating arm. 
The mathematical model used in this study was a fairly 
realistic representation of ship dynamic motions and 
similar to that developed in Section 8.1.
  The solid-line curves in Fig. 167 show steady-turning 
rates (r') predicted for ships A, B, and C. Arrows along 
the curves show the sequence of results predicted for 
the spiral tests. Dotted lines indicate the jump in 
steady-turning rate during spiral tests of dynamically 
unstable ships B and C.
  To show the operational effects of excess instability, 
zigzag maneuver trajectories were computed for the 
three ships at an approach speed of 14.5 knots (l/J = 
heading angle). Results of a series of digital ·simula-

YAW-RATE
r'•L/R
0.8


tions indicated dynamic behavior of these ships 
during the zigzag maneuvers as follows: The 
dynamically sta­ ble ship A has a small overshoot 
angle and can quickly finish a zigzag maneuver. The 
unstable ship B has a larger overshoot angle and it 
takes more time to finish the test than does ship A.  
While ship  B finished  the 15 to 15 deg zigzag test in 
a stable fashion,  it  could not finish zigzag tests of 
7.5-7.5 and 5-5 deg (Fig. 168) in a stable manner (the 
heading angle was oscillatory, divergent in unstable 
patterns). For the very unstable ship C, for which 
heading angle is divergent after the first executioin of 
rudder angle, recovery cannot be achieved by the use 
of the opposing rudder  angle  at the second 
execution. Ship C did finish the 15-15 deg zigzag 
maneuver test in stable fashion because of the 
significant contribution of the nonlinear terms.
  Since unstable ships cannot finish ordinary zigzag 
tests in a stable manner when contributions of nonlin­ 
ear terms are relatively small, as in the  case  of  5-5 
deg zigzag shown in Fig. 168, the modified zigzag 
can be used to obtain test results in a stable manner 
for better comparison of capability. Fig. 169 shows 
pre­ dictions of heading angle response during a 
modified zigzag maneuver in which the  rudder  angle 
of  5 deg is shifted to the opposite direction when 
heading angle deviations reach only 1 deg instead of a 
heading change equal to the rudder angle. Both ships 
A and  B  may thus be acceptable performers in full-
scale operations, but ship C remains problematical.
  One useful design technique for simultaneously as­ 
sessing both turning ability and dynamic stability  of 
the hull-propeller-rudder arrangement is to  make  use 
of the Diagram of Steering. This diagram, based on 
the design's steady turning  motion  characteristics, 
plots rate of turn (r') drift angle {JJ), residual  speed 
ratio in the turn (V'),  and  turning  diameter  (STDIL) 
all against steady rudder angle (6R) as shown in Fig. 
170.
The diagram  of  steering  is convenient  to use in de­
sign tradeoff studies since it reflects any significant 
change in hull configuration or rudder parameters. 
Tracing the change of the diagram of steering form


and  principal  characteristics  (6p0     ,    slope  of  branches,


-0.8
Fig. 167 Steady turning rate versus rudder angle


SHIP C


minimum STDIL ratio, maximum drift 
angle, maxi­ mum angular velocity) the 
designer can investigate


 	 




the impacts of hull appendages, skeg stabilizers, pro- 
peller modifications, and variations in rudder efficiency. 
For example, Fig. 171 shows several typical situations. 
In Curve 1, where the zone of instability is large and 
slope of the branches is small, the ship is slow in 
response to a rudder angle change when the "meeting 
rudder" maneuver (opposite rudder ordered to counter 
turn) is executed. When the zone is smaller (Curve 2) 
the meeting rudder characteristics  are  better,  as  well 
as all of the  other  maneuverability  parameters.  Curve 
4 is a design that has  more  than  minimum  stability 
and offers degraded performance over the  ship  of 
Curve 3 which also has adequate stability.
  The diagram of steering is useful throughout the 
design cycle for evaluating performance options and 
can be effectively used in retrofit situations after a 
vessel has been in service. In the early phases of de- 
sign, maneuvering prediction models such as those 
described in Section 16.7, based only on major char- 
acteristics, can be used to predict elements of the dia- 
gram of steering. As the design is refined, more 
sophisticated prediction models based on coefficients 
developed from theory or from model testing can be 
used. Finally, spiral and turning trials can provide data 
from the full-scale ship for direct comparison with 
design predictions.
  While greatest attention needs to be placed on the 
hull-propeller-rudder arrangement in ensuring that the 
ship shall have the inherent  capabilities necessary  for 
a good handling vessel, many other variables are also 
important. Fig. 172 notes many of the major design 
variables that have impact on controllability. Variables 
such as house location and bridge layout with attention 
to details affecting visibility and ease of operation can


have major affect on the piloted controllability of the 
vessel. Not all these aspects of design are  covered  
here, but Vantine (1976)provides guidelines on 
bridge layout to ensure conning effectiveness. 
Marino and Cooper, (1982),Van Donselaar, et al 
(1979)and Draft Guidelines (1985)also address the 
bridge design prob- lem.
Only  approximate   rules   are   provided   for reader
awareness in Fig. 172. Each design presents its own 
peculiar problems requiring earlier or later detailed 
analysis of capabilities. The appropriate strategy for 
solving them will vary depending on ship type, size, 
cargo route, port situation, and other considerations.



330	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



Table 22-Controllability



•	Rules of thumb-Rough ides based on individual experience or other 
commonsense "truisms'
•	Design guides-Formulas, tables, or figures recommending sizes or desirable 
parameter ratios and warning of  potential  problem areas (based  on experience 
of existing vessels, series model tests, or simulation studies).
These may be merely somebody else's published rules of thumb, but at least 
rules that have been satisfactory for years
•	Design data sheets and engineering principles-Detailed procedures (available 
generally only for machinery items) and equations for predicting performance, 
as prepared by groups or recognized experts with technical backgrounds
•	Digital computer predictions-Mathematical models (simple or SOJ?histicated) 
based on similar ship model coefficients used to predict maneuvenng



Level of Desigti Where Normally
 	Used	
Concept Preliminary Contract Detail

X	X



X	X	X

X	X	X


trajectorr performance
•	Free-running self-propelled models-Small models of the new design run in 
basins witli traJectories scaled up to predict at-sea performance
•	Captive model tests and digital computer simulation-Series of captive model 
tests [rotating arm and planar motion mechanism (PMM)] using the hull form 
result in coefficients that are then used in mathematical models to predict 
maneuvering trajectory performance
•	H'J!draulic waterway model with self-propelled ship models-Ship models run 
m accurately modeled waterways to gain knowledge of bank and constrained 
water effects
•	Man-in-the-loop simulation-Bridge simulations using sophisticated digital 
computer ship maneuvering models to show trajectory performance when 
operator variability and performance under stress are included


X	X	X
X	X


X	X	X

X	X

X	X	X



STBD



 
1.2

PORT









Fig. 170 Diagram of Steering of an unstable ship (Asinovsky, 1989)
  

Types of design analysis tools may be 
classified as shown in Table 22. The 
level of design at which the tools are 
normally utilized is indicated in the 
table, but


CONTROLLABILITY	331

Table 23-Effect of Increasing Fin Area, Holding Aspect Ratio Constant, or of 
Increasing Aspect Ratio, Holding Fin Area Constant, on the Hydrodynamic 
Derivatives, on Controls-Fixed Stability, and on Steady Turning Radius
(a)	For Fixed Fins Locat.ed Forward of 00
Derivative	Effect on the	Effect on		Effect on 
derivative		stability	steady  turning
radius
Y.	more negative	favorable	unfavorable
(58)
N,	more negative	favorable	unfavorable 
(59c)
N.	more negative	unfavorable	favorable 
aess positive)
59a)
Y,	less91,)sitive	unfavorable	favorable 
(5 )
(b)	For Fixed Fins Located Aft of 00
Y.	more negative	favorable	unfavorable
(58)
N,	more negative	favorable	unfavorable 
(59c)
N.	less negative	favorable	unfavorable 
(more positive)
(59a)
Y,	more sositive	favorable	unfavorable 
(59o
(c)	For Movable Fins (Rudders) Aft of 00
Y.	more negative	favorable	unfavorable
(58)
Ya	more positive	favorable
N	more negative	favorable
N,	more negative	favorable	unfavorable 
(59c)
N.	less negative	favorable	unfavorable 
(more positive)
(59a)
Y,	more sositive	favorable	unfavorable 
(59o




their actual application may need to be earlier or later 
in any particular case.
  If the design is based on a previous class, the naval 
architect should review the historic controllability 
characteristics of that class. These characteristics will 
be affected by changes in ship geometry, control sur­ 
faces provided, propulsion type installed, and the ar­ 
rangements of the vessel. Because alterations can have 
large effects, they require thorough analysis.
  An evaluation of trade routes and ports of call, to 
include restrictions present in harbors and approach 
waters, will help establish the operating  environment 
of the vessel and identify whatever special capabilities 
may be needed in meeting design operational goals. 
Various historical and comparative ratios may be use­ 
ful. Glansdorp (1976) suggested the use of three of 
these service ratios:
Slow-Speed Service Ratio



Voyage time in difficult areas at maneuvering speed 
Total voyage sailing time
Dense-Traffic-Service Ratio
Voyage time in areas of dense traffic flows
_.,;;.._.:;,_--==---=------:-:-:-----:--:------
Total voyage sailing time
Difficult-Geography Service Ratio
Voyage time in geographically difficult areas 
Total voyage sailing time

  He also proposed that use of a ship's risk factor (or 
potential for serious difficulties) be considered during 
design. The factor could incorporate the nature of the cargo 
and quantity, crew capability, vessel protection, nature of 
prime mover (nuclear for example), and other items that 
might affect risk.


HOUSE
•	loc:ation on the mldlhlp1 i1 beat for 
rate-of-tum .perception and n1vlg1tlng 
on reno••
•	Aft vllibility needed for tight
maneuvering condition,
•	Small houM In central location
minimizes turning momenta In wind
•	Higher helpe vlalbility forward



BRIDGE
•	Arrange for HIV conning
•	lndicatora lhould be HIV 
to reed day Ind night
•	Rate-of-tum 
Indicator and other 
deviCH helpful
•	FOlw1rd vllibility 
important: Window 
1unecreening, end Mlf-
cleaning lize, location











RUDDER
•	lncrHMd size yield• better
cou-kNplng end l'ffl)OMiwnen In 
turning
•	lncraaMd rate provide, faster
reaponM
•	Type and balance affects torque 
requirements
•	Mult be Inflow from propeller for 
effective- It lowlpffd
•	Redundant mean, of power and 
mech1nlc1I or electronic tr1namiAion 
critical In emergenc:iff







PROPELLER
•	Twin rudders better If twin acr­ 
lpropeller should tum outboard)
•	Controllable-pitch propellers ICPP) 
may Improve degrN of controllability 
but ION ltHring ability at 0-deg 
angle blade position; strong 
p1ddlawheel effecta at •low IPNdl























•	Flnene11 Improve, flow to th• rudder
and lta effectivena11
•	Cutaway Item and lack of 1keg 
reduce dynamic stability
•	Excfflive lateral plane aft may make 
ship hard to turn, with I larger 
turning diameter
•	Lateral plane centroid effecta turning 
ability, course kNping, and rotational 
effect of current on v-1













•	1hp/A affecta maximum raaponM 
ability
•	Time to reverae affects stopping
•	Number of starts available 11 critical 
for maneuvering of diffell without 
CPP
•	Minimum speed for slow ship 
operation
•	Ratio of ahHd to eltem power 
1ffecta stopping control
•	Engine reaponM can vary 
1ignlflcantly according to prime 
movers
•	Reliable machinery very Important




GENERAL
•	Lower B/1., B/T or c.Improves
directional 1t1bility
•	Large heavy lhlpe react alower then 
1m1II 1hipa and can tolerate more 
dynamic In 1t1blllty
•	Trim by atem incr•a- tumdiameter 
and directional stability
•	Broad beam decrean1 ltNring 
without propeller w11h



•	Abovewater area and trim conditions 
effect wind-Induced turning -nta 
lateral drift. and visibility





ANCHORING AND TOWING
•	ea.. of UM of anchor and reliability 
of equipment can be critical in
emergency
•	Arrangement of towline leads and 
acce11 to lin• Important in an 
emergency lbow Ind ateml
•	Anchors are umul maneuvering
dmcel If adequately sized
•	Emergency towing requirementa








FOREBODY
•	FlnenH1 may slightly improve 
directional 1t1bllity
•	Fatne11 cen caun trim forward 
in shallow water
•	Bulb cen Interfere with UM of anchor
If bowflare ii  not carefully considered
•	Bulb can prohibit working a bow
against a pier
•	Flare It bow can prohibit working 
against • pier and ulling a tug 
alongside well forwerd






;-,ug
zn
,:.;..;
m
en
.0,,
z
,...
►;,g
n
::c
=mi
q
C
;,g
m








Fig.  172    Some controllability design notes


CONTROLLABILITY	333



  A particular waterway or special mission such as 
cable laying may force consideration of a bow or stern 
thruster for positive control of a vessel at low speeds 
without tug assistance. For some vessels careful con- 
sideration of harbor maneuvering requirements is im- 
portant at the very beginning of a  ship  design. 
Knowing of potential vessel handling difficulties can 
help the naval architect and owner select a propulsion 
plant, propeller, and rudder arrangement  to  improve 
the handling characteristics of the vessel where diffi- 
cult maneuvering situations are anticipated. With this 
knowledge in mind, the owner and designer should list 
the required vessel handling capabilities, considering 
items such as:
 (a)	Harbor environment:
•	special maneuvering requirements
•	location of dock, etc.
•	currents or winds
•	water depth
•	maneuvering speeds
•	traffic lane or passage width
•	tug assistance and mode of tug use
(b)	Maneuvering devices:
•	bow  or  stern thruster
•	number  of propellers
•	controllable-pitch propeller
•	rudder type and arrangement
•	rudder or steering augments
•	maximum rudder angle
•	rudder rate
•	Kort nozzle
•	anchors
(c)	Navigating devices:
•	echo sounder
•	Doppler sonar
•	radar
•	SAT NAV (satellite navigator)
•	rate of turn indicator
(d)	Manning requirements:
•	deck personnel
•	machinery personnel
(e)	Degree of bridge system integration and ease of 
navigation and controllability related operations
  (f)	Owner experience or preferences in manning, 
equipment, and maintenance policies.
  Although a guide to analyzing performance of a 
design is presented here, specific requirements and 
standards to be met using the criteria described in the 
previous section are currently few. Generally the stan- 
dard for performance will be that  the  vessel  operate 
in a fashion similar to that of a previous design.
  With the recent proliferation of special-purpose  
ships and with the increased concern for safety and 
environmental protection, careful attention must be 
paid to controllability design. This attention  often 
needs to start in the early stages of design, and it may 
lead to performing model tests to establish accepta- 
bility. Even before a hull shape is defined, decisions



made about principal dimensions can have serious ef- 
fects on controllability.
  The next three parts of this section (16.2, 16.3, and 
16.4) will describe the effects of major design param- 
eters on controllability. The process of comparing with 
an existing design and using basic characteristics to 
predict performance capability will be addressed  in 
Part 16.5. An example prediction method for deter- 
mining dynamic stability will be presented in Part 16.6. 
Use of trajectory prediction models based on major 
characteristics, and the more advanced approaches us- 
ing model testing and design-oriented modular models 
will follow in Parts 16.7 and 16.8. Finally, in Part 16.9, 
shiphandling simulation involving man-in-the-
Ioopcon- siderations will be addressed as a design tool 
for both ships and waterways.
  16.2	EHed of Fixed and Movable Fins on Cantrols- 
Fixed Stability and on Turning Equations (58), (59a-
c) permit evaluation of the effect of fin area, aspect 
ratio, and location on the major stability derivatives. 
This information, in conjunction with that in Table 1, 
can be used to determine the qualitative effect on con- 
trols-fixed stability and on the radius  of  the  steady 
turn within the range where linear theory is applicable.




334	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



This information is summarized in Table 23 for three 
common situations:
(a)	Fixed fins located forward of the midlength.
(b)	Fixed fins located aft of the midlength.



+6



+5


Ill



.a.,:
.A...,..,
..,     ..I


(c)	Movable fins (rudder) located aft of the midlength.


+4     A.      Cz
%	c


  In all three of these situations, the qualitative effects 
on  the  hydrodynamic  derivatives  (not on stability and
turning) of increasing fin area or fin aspect ratio at a 
fixed location or of moving a fin of constant area and


.I.ll,
..I
+3    ID
Ill
z
:,


.._a:
ol!t
.:.z.:0
ell II:
z..,


aspect ratio toward the extremities of the ship are the


+2     ►.a.,:


-'a:
Q.111


same, except for the effect of Yr and Y8 •


While these


>	-il1;&a1
0	.a.,:


two derivatives increase negatively (decrease algebra­ 
ically) with increased fin area and aspect ratio, they


-90    + I   z
A.	.C.,
Ill



CL
Ill


are independent of fin location. Thus while (a) and (b)


-100 0


..I	z
ID    a


of Table 23 show that adding fin area anywhere along	ID


:!
Ill


.C.,
:z:



:!	:z,	...
 


the ship length may improve stability, they also show 
that moving a fin of constant area and aspect ratio


Ill	,.; 0
-120   -I    ..I
..I	ID


forward   may  impair  stability   because the favorable	C	:!	C
z	Ill	:z:


effect of a negative increase in Yv is lost.
These effects are illustrated by the computed results


: -140 -2 a: c.,
C	0
::E


shown in Fig. 173 for the stable Mariner Class, the


II:


C..J


.a.,:


f -160 -3 c.,


Ill


marginally stable, the unstable, and the very unstable


..,


Ill	0


hull forms described in Section 8.7 and Fig. 45. The 
effect of added fin area and changes in fin location 
were computed from Equations (14a), (122b), (58), 
(59a-c),  (62a-c),   and   (78).   The   two   fin   areas, 
A'1 = 0.008 and 0.016, were in both cases assumed to 
have a square profile as shown in Fig. 173; that is,
both have an effective aspect ratio of 2.0. It is seen in 
Fig. 173 that, for these hull forms, adding· fin area 
anywhere along the model length except in the region 
of the bow improves stability compared to the no-fin 
ease but with much diminished effect as the fin is 
moved forward. Furthermore, the stability is dimin­ 
ished as  a fin of  constant area is moved forward until 
a location close to the bow is reached corresponding to 
the pivot point discussed in Section 6.1. At this point, 
adding fin area tends to impair stability very slightly. 
Fig. 174 shows corresponding information for the 
linear turning parameter or' I 06R whose most mean­ 
ingful physical interpretation in the current context is 
degrees change of heading per ship length of travel
per degree rudder deflection.
  As explained in Section 6.4, a negative or' I o6R is 
associated with stable ships, and a positive or' I 06R 
with unstable ships. The following equation developed 
from Equation (26a) was used to compute or' I o6R:


..J
C
c.,
Ill -180 -4
-60	-40	-20	0	20	80
ORIGIN
DISTANCE OF FIN FROM ORIGIN • IN % L
Fig. 17 4 Effect of fin area and fin location on or' I 06 for typical ships


effect on turning. These effects are not, however, 
dis­ played by the unstable and very unstab e ships 
of Fi . 174, which shows that they are not 
universally appli­ cable.
  The effect of fin location on or' I o6R for the 
margin­ ally stable ship in Fig. 174 is 
extraordinarily pro­ nounced near the bow. This 
relationship arises from the fact that according to the 
figure the stability index and hence the stability 
criterion C hovers near zero for fins located in this 
region. Since in (127) the expres­ sion for or' I o6R 
contains only C in the denominator, it increases 
without limit as C approaches zero. This 
pronounced effect on or' I 06R predicted by linear 
theory is not observed in practice, for strong 
nonlinear effects take effect as the angular velocity 
departs substan­ tially from zero. Thus, according to 
the nonlinear re­
sults shown  in  Fig. 45, the angular  velocity  at  6R =
10 deg is not significantly different for the marginally


or'


N'vY'6-	Y'vM'a


(127)


stable ship as 
compared to the 
stable ship.


-06-R - ------c::c:----

  Figure 169 like Fig 173, confirms the trends noted 
in Table 23(a, b). It also shows that locating the fin 
anywhere between the bow and forward quarter point 
of the stable and marginally stable ships improves 
turning relative to the no-fin case. Furthermore, in­ 
creasing fin area in this vicinity has a small favorable
  

A practical example of the effect of adding forward 
profile  area in the form  of  "filling"  in the forefoot of 
a ship is shown in the comparison between Models 
60P2 and 60Pl in Table 24 taken from Eda and Crane 
(1965). The experimental values of the derivatives 
follow pre­ cisely the trends indicated in Table 23. In 
this case the stability is slightly improved by the 
additional forefoot area and presumably the turning 
would be impaired


CONTROLLABILITY	335



slightly. This result is in accord with those shown in 
Table 23. The slight improvement in stability is due 
entirely to the very large  increase  in Yv. If the  value 
of Yv for Model 60Pl were assumed to be intermediate 
between those of Models 60P2 and 2,1,1, its stability 
would be almost identical to that of Model 60P2.
  Another practical example is noted by Arontzen and 
Mandel (1960).There the effect of a fairwater (sail) on 
the controls-fixed stability in the horizontal plane of a 
submarine in the submerged condition is  also  shown 
to be favorable. In this case, the centroid of the fair- 
water profile area was located about 15 percent of the 
length of the submarine forward of its midlength.
  Table 23(b) shows that the effects on all of the de- 
rivatives of increasing the area of a fixed fin aft or of






increasing its aspect ratio are decidedly favorable to 
controls-fixed stability and unfavorable to  the  radius 
of the steady turn. Figs. 173 and 174, show similar 
effects for moving a fin of constant area and aspect 
ratio aft. All of these effects, except that on Yv, are 
confirmed for practical changes in ship profiles aft by 
the comparison between Model 2,1,1 and Model 60Pl 
in Table 24. Figs. 52 and 53 also show quantitative 
evidence of the favorable effect on the stability  index 
of fixed fin area aft added in the form of skeg  area. 
Fig. 175 shows similar evidence for fin area added in 
the fo~ of rudder area (see Fig. 54) rather than skeg 
area.
  Bilge keels are another example of additional fixed 
fin area. These usually improve stability, but their ef- 
fect on turning depends on their fore-and-aft location 
and on their longitudinal extent.
  The effect of changes in trim of a ship may be pre- 
dicted on the basis of fin area considerations. Trim by 
the stern results  in additional  profile area  aft,  which 
is favorable to stability and unfavorable  to  turning, 
and in reduced profile area forward, which has little 
effect on either stability or turning. On the other hand, 
trim by the  bow decreases  profile area  aft  which has 
a decidedly unfavorable effect on stability and a fa- 
vorable effect on turning, while the increased profile 
area forward has little effect on either.
  The fact that the addition of fixed fin area of 
constant aspect ratio aft has the universal effect of 
improving stability but impairing turning and the fact 
that in- creasing the stability criterion C impairs 
turning ac- cording to linear theory have led to the 
generally held belief concerning ships-that	good 
stability and good turning	are mutually 
incompatible qualities; that changes made to improve 
one of these qualities inev- itably impair the other. 
Table 23(c) shows however, that if the increase in aft 
fin area  or  aspect  ratio  is due to a change in movable 
rudder  characteristics rather than to a change in fixed 
fin characteristics, the additional area or aspect ratio 
not only has a decidedly favorable effect on stability 
but may also have a fa- vorable effect on turning. This 
possibility is shown in Fig. 213.
  However, the trends determined from the linear the- 
ory displayed in Table 23(c) show that the effect of 
increasing rudder area, holding aspect ratio  constant, 
on each of the derivatives, is not universally favorable 
as far as turning is concerned; only the effects of  Ya 
and Na are favorable. Hence, it is entirely possible that 
in some cases increasing the rudder area and holding 
aspect ratio constant will not improve turning.
  To summarize, four important conclusions based on 
linear theory but also borne out in practice have been 
reached in this subsection:
  (a)	Adding fixed· fin area and holding aspect ratio 
constant, either aft or forward, has a favorable  effect 
on stability but with vanishing effect as the fin 
location approaches the pivot point.


336	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

  (b)	Adding  fixed fin area  aft  or  increasing fixed fin	der and propeller and models with rudder and propel- 
aspect  ratio  aft  has  a  decidedly unfavorable effect on	ler.
turning.   Adding  fixed fin area  or  increasing fixed fin		(a) Stability is in general impaired as the block coef- 
aspect  ratio  in the  vicinity of  the  pivot point may im-	ficient is increased.
prove turning.	(b) In almost all cases, the stability index is im-
(c)	The qualities  of controls-fixed stability and small	proved by increasing the LIB ratio.
turning  radius  are  not  necessarily incompatible either		(c) In almost all cases,  stability  is impaired  by  in- 
in theory  or in practice,  and a ship may in fact possess	creasing the LIT ratio, i.e., by decreasing the  draft. 
both  qualities  in superior measure.	Theory seriously overpredicts this effect compared to
(d)	Increasing   rudder  area  does not  in all cases re-	experiment, but the trends are the same.
duce  the  turning  radius  of a ship.			The block coefficient (CB) series shown in Table 6 
The  preceding   are  the  important   direct effects of	includes a substantial variation in  LCG (0.475L  to fixed 
and  movable fins on stability  and turning.  Fixed		0.515L aft of the bow) associated  with the  primary fins  
can  also  exert  important  indirect  effects on sta-		variation in block coefficient. The more forward loca- 
bility and  turning.  For  example, fixed fins in the form		tion of LCG is associated with the  large  CB while the 
of skegs  like those  shown in Fig. 52 strongly influence		aft location is associated with the low CB' These LCG 
the  magnitude  of the  straightening   effect, E, (see Fig.		locations stem from minimum resistance consideration
22)	and hence influence the rudder force and moment and are in accord with usual ship design practice.  In 
exerted during steady turns. Experimental data re-  order  to  show the  separate  effects of these  two  vari-  
ported by Eskigian (1956) for Model 842 of Table 5, ations  on the  stability  index, use  was  made of Equa- 
fitted with twin screws,  show that  for rudders  located  tions  (14) and  (14a) which  permit  evaluation  of  the 
on the  centerline  with their  midchord about  0.45L  aft     effect of  LCG location on the  stability  index. The  re-
of 00, the  straightening   effect, E, amounts to:	suIts  of these  calculations  showing the  stability index
as  a  function  of  LCG  location  for  a  constant block
  (a)	20  percent   of  the  geometric  drift  angle at  the	coefficient (CB = 0.60) and showing the stability index 
rudder  for  the  ease  of no skeg ...	as  a  function  of  CB   value  for  a  fixed  LCG position
(b)	55 percent  of t~e geo~e~c	drIft  angle  for  ~he   (0.505L  aft)  are  tabulated   in Table  25 and  plotted in
case of a skeg extendmg  to withm 0.08L  of the leadmg	Figs. 175 and 176. These figures show that the gen- 
edge  of the rudder ...	erally  unfavorable  effect  on the  stability  index  of in-
(c)	7~ percen~ o~the geometric drift angle for a skeg	creasing  the  block  coefficient, evident  in  Table  6, is
extendmg  to withm  0.03L  of the rudder.	accentuated  if  the  LCG location is  held compared  to
  16.3	Effect of Hull Configuration on Controls-Fixed the case where the LCG location is moved forward. In 
Stability. Jacobs (1964)and Eda and Crane (1965)de- Table 25 the  origin  location  remains  unchanged  for 
scribe an extensive study  of  the  effect of  hull  shape  each of the  three  models, but  the  physical character- 
and proportions on controls-fixed stability, based on istics of the three models, but the physical character- 
systematic variations of  the  Series  60 form.  Results  istics of the  three  models are  assumed  to  be changed 
are given in Tables  6, 24, and  26; and  some  of  tthe  by the change  in the location of the center  of gravity.  
data are plotted in Figs. 175 and 176. Three general Hence the results  show, as  they  should, that  the  sta-  
trends concerning hull shape and proportions are dis- bility index is affected by the change in LCG location. 
played in these figures, both by theoretical predictions However,  as  long as  the  location of the  origin  is not 
and by experimental  results  using models without rud-    changed,  the  values  of the  hydrodynamic derivative~





CONTROLLABILITY	337
Table 25-Stability Index and Turning Parameter or' /06 as a Function of LCG Location and Block Coefficient-Series 60
Model	2,1,1	7,1,1	8,1,1
Cs	0.60 ----	0.70	0.80


LCG/L from Table (7) 
Selected variation of LCG/ L


/,--0-.47-5--0.50.15505


0.51 5	0.505
,5,


l'0il.4m750.475-0-.-5.0..5.,


Corresponding x'G
Corres_ponding x'00
0- 1 with rudder and 
propeller
u 1 without rudder 
and propeller
ar' I	with rudder 
and propeller



Theory Exper. 
Theory Exper. 
Theory Exper.


+0.040	+0.010
	0
	0
	0
	-0.030






given in Table 6 apply without change, regardless of 
LCG location.
  To gain insight into the effect of hull parameters on 
the stability index, it is useful also to examine their 
effect on the hydrodynamic derivatives. Table 6 shows, 
for example, that an increase in the length-beam ratio 
causes hardly any change in the theoretical values of  
the hydrodynamic derivatives but does cause a sub­ 
stantial decrease in the mass coefficient, A'.
  With a fixed-length model, changes in the LIB ratio 
must be accompanied by either changes in the BIT 
ratio or in the LIT ratio. The latter ratio is, however, 
considered to be of far greater importance insofar as 
the effect on the stability derivatives in the horizontal 
plane is concerned. Therefore, the LIT ratio appears 
as a separate series in Table 6, but both it and the 
LIB series also involve changes in the BIT ratio.
  In accord with Table 1, the decrease in mass coef­ 
ficient improves stability as the LIB ratio is increased. 
In view of the scatter in the experimental values of 
the hydrodynamic derivatives of Table 6, they cannot 
be said to confirm the theoretical results; but neither 
do the experimental data exhibit any consistent trend 
with the LIB ratio that disagrees with the theoretical 
results. It is therefore concluded that the major effect 
of increasing the LIB ratio is to decrease the mass 
coefficient, which in turn improves stability.
  The theoretical and experimental values of the de­ 
rivatives of Table 6 show that the effects of increasing


deep draft, provided the trim by the stern in the light draft 
condition is not greater than in full load condition. The 
experimental data of Fig. 175 show the inter­ esting fact that 
the change in relative rudder area A'8


t
; +0.1i----. -l;....F_R_O_MTT._AB"""L=E.....;2;,;;.,51'--'t"--::::--+-t--.,._ioa;::I

u,
z











0 -0.3,_ 	L/VARYING	 	 ( FROM 
TABLE 6b I
             I L/TVARYING 
(FROM TABLE 6b l


the length-draft, LIT, ratio are:
(a)	Y'v is less negative (destabilizing)
(b)	N'v is less negative (stabilizing)
(c)	N' r is less negative (destabilizing)


-OA--- --- ----+	1

-	EXPERIMENTALLY DETERMINED DERIVATIVES
---	THEORETICALLY PREDICTED DERIVATIVES
-o.!5. 	....J..._,_        .J.....---1---'---...._.J..... 		 	,


  The theoretical values of Y'r becomes less positive 
(also destabilizing according to Table 1) with increas­


6.0	6.!5	7.0	7.!5	ao
L/9


ing LIT ratio, but the experimental values exhibit a 
very small opposite trend. The value of A' =



 
14	1.6	1.8	2.0	2.2	2.4
L/T


M(pl2)L2T did not change with the LIT ratio in Table	 	


6 because A was changed in direct proportion to T.
Since the changes in at least two of the derivatives


0'48	0'49	0.50
LCGJ\.. AFT BOW


0.!51


are destabilizing and the change in only one derivative 
is stabilizing, the stability is impaired as the length­


0.60	0.65


0.70
c,


0.7!5	0.80


draft ratio is increased. Thus, a ship at light draft will 
have less controls-fixed stability than the same ship at


Fig. 176  Effect  of  hull-form  parameters  on  stability  index  CT1;  Series  60 bare hull


338	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 26-Effect of Ship Section Shape on the Hydrodynamic Derivatives and on the Stability Index
Model No. from


Table 10
 Section Shape 
How Determined 
Condition 
Reference No.
N'.


1,1,1
	9,
1,1
	1,
1,1
	9,
1,1
	1,
0,0
	9,
0,0
	1,
0,0
	9,
0,0
N
o
r
m
a
l
	
V
e
e
	
N
o
r
m
a
l
	
V
e
e
	
N
o
r
m
a
l
	
V
e
e
	
N
o
r
m
a
l
	
V
e
e
 
E
 
p
e
r
i
m
e
n
t
	
	
T
h
e
o
r
y
	
	
	
E
x
p
E
!
r
i
m
e
n
t
	
	
T
h
e
o
r
y
----With 
Propeller and 
Rudder ---	-Without Propeller and Rudder---.._
-(Eda and 
Crane, 
1965)--	-------(Jacobs, 1964)--------..

-0.108	-
0.117	-
0.088
	N.
A.
	N.
A.
	N.
A.	-
0.112
	N.
A.


Y' r
N' r


+0.
08
8	+0.081	+0.077	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	+0.052	N.A.
-
0.0
67	-0.075	-0.066	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.	-0.055	N.A.


0-1	-0.41	-0.39	-0.59	-0.62	N.A.	-0.17	-0.20	-0.17




from 0.012 to 0.024 exerts greater influence on the 
stability index than do the displayed changes in  the 
LIB and LIT ratios. From a practical design point of 
view, it is therefore usually preferable to attempt to 
alter controls-fixed stability by adjusting  rudder  area 
or fin area rather than by changing the basic dimen­ 
sions of a ship.
  Table 26 shows that a change in the section shape 
from normal Series 60 shape to an extreme Vee shape, 
in ships of normal proportions (LIB = 7.5, LIT  = 
18.75, C8 = 0.60), has little effect on the hydrodynamic 
derivatives or on the stability index. This result is 
obtained whether the derivatives are determined ex­ 
perimentally or calculated theoretically and  whether 
the model is equipped  with rudder and propeller or not.
  To show the effect of block coefficient on the hydro­ 
dynamic derivatives, it is necessary to correct the lat­ 
ter values given in Table 6 so that they apply to a


common origin. The common origin 
selected for all three block coefficients 
was the 0.505L position of the LCG of 
Model 7. The values of the derivatives 
about this origin were computed by the 
following equations, which can be 
derived from Equations (14a-c):
(Y'.)o.506 = (Y',,)o.,16,o.s15
(N',,)0.505 = (N',,)0.,16, o.s15 - (Y'v)x'
(Y'r)0.506 = (Y'r)0.475,0.515 - (Y',,)x'
(N'r)o.50s = (N'r)o.,1s.o.s1s -  (Y ' ,,)x' 2 -	(Y'r)o_505X'
- (N',,)o.60sX'
where

  (a)	The numerical subscripts refer to 
the origin lo­ cation as function of the 
ship length.




Table 27-Stability Derivatives, Stability Indexes, and Turning Parameter a,•/aa. as a Function of Block Coefficients­
Series 60
(Fixed Origin and LCG; x'0 = O; x'00 = +0.005)
(a)	Model With Propeller and Rudder
Model	2	7	8
CB	0.60	0.70	0.80


A'
Theory


0.171


Exper.	Theory


0.200


Exper.	Theory


0.229


Exper.


Y' •
Y'
N'r


-
0.3
35	-0.305	-0.335	-0.324	-0.335	-0.354
-
0.0
83	-0.092	-0.097	-0.104	-0.105	-0.097
+0.
07
9	+0.093	+0.075	+0.083	+0.079	+0.075
-
0.0
66	-0.070	-0.068	-0.066	-0.077	-0.060


0-1	-0.57	-0.53	-0.35	-0.31	-0.26	-0.20
C' X  102	+1.45	+1.41	+1.07	+0.92	+LOO	+0.63
Y'a	+0.038	+0.050	+0.038	+0.052	+0.038	+0.065
N'a	-0.019	-0.024	-0.019	-0.025	-0.019	-0.035
cJ'rlcJ6	-0.67	-0.85	-0.94	-1.44	-1.03	-2.99
(b) Model Without Propeller or Rudder


y•.
Y'r


-
0.3
03	-0.245	-0.306	-0.287	-0.309	-0.256
-
0.1
07	-0.112	-0.121	-0.121	-0.130	-0.101
+0.
055	+0.072	+0.051	+0.051	+0.055	+0.067


N'r	-0.054	-0.055	-0.056	-0.056	-0.066	-0.053
0-1	-0.17	-0.10	+0.03	+0.07	+0.06	+0.09


CONTROLLABILITY	339



  (b)	x' = +0.010 in the case of Model 2 (CB = 0.60)
where the origin initially is at 0.515L aft of the bow.
  (c)	x' = -0.030 in the case of Model 8 (CB= 0.80) 
where the origin initially is at 0.475L aft of the bow. 
The results of these computations are shown in Ta­ 
ble 27. The values of the stability indexes shown in 
Table 27 are of course identical to the values shown
in Table 25.
Table 27 reveals the following trends:
  (a)	Y' v-Theory indicates no significant change with



this basis Jacobs (1964) merged the effects of  C8  and 
LIB and chose to display CT as  a function of  tl'  with 
the LIT ratio as a parameter. The pertinent data are 
tabulated in Table 28 and plotted in Fig. 177.
  Jacobs fitted the following empirical expression 
to the data shown in Fig. 177(b) which she suggested 
was appropriate for stable ships with large skegs at 
the stern:

5	)


C8 • Experimental results with propeller and rudder


CTi  ::::-    ( /l'  -    Y'v)LIT	( l 28)


show that Yv'  increases negatively with increasing C8 •


This is a stabilizing trend.
  (b)	N' v-Theory indicates that it should increase 
negatively (destabilizing), but experimental values do 
not in some cases confirm this trend.
  (c)	Y' r-Theory indicates no consistent trend, but 
the experimental data for the model with propeller and 
rudder show a decrease in the positive value of this 
derivative with increasing C8 • This is a destabilizing 
trend.
  (cl) N\-Theory indicates that it should increase 
slightly in negative value (stabilizing), but the exper­ 
imental values show a slight opposite trend.
  The preceding trends indicate that the reduction in 
stability associated with an increase in block coeffi­ 
cient, as shown in Figs. 175 and 176, results largely 
from the increase in the mass coefficient A' associated 
with increased C8 and not from changes in the hydro­ 
dynamics derivatives. This same conclusion was 
reached in evaluating the effect of the LIB ratio. On


(EXPERIMENTAL POINTS ARE IDENTIFIED BY MODEL NUMBER)





◆	Q
I

tr 2,0..o--,a -----..-


This relationship is also plotted in Fig. 177 where it 
agrees reasonably well with the CT-values computed 
from the theoretically calculated derivatives.
  Equation (128) has three major weaknesses that se­ 
riously limit its applicability:
  (a)	Although it ostensibly depends only on A', Y'v, 
and the  LIT  ratio, it also includes the spurious  effect 
of a variation in LCG / L as discussed in this section.
  (b)	It fails to include the effects of differences of fin 
area, rudder area, and propeller influences, which are 
important even in stable ships.
  (c)	It applies only to stable ships; it cannot, there­ 
fore, predict whether a given design will be stable or 
unstable, which is often the important question in 
de­ sign.
  Hence, the equations of Section 9 are preferable for 
use in predicting the controls-fixed stability of a new 
design.
  16.4	Effed of Hull Configuration on Nonlinear and 
linear Maneuvers. Because of the high cost of the 
experiments needed to predict nonlinear  maneuvers 
and because of the lack of  universality  of the results  
of those experiments, the effect of  hull configuration 
on nonlinear maneuvers has not been extensively stud­ 
ied. Two of the available studies, Shiba (1960) and 
Davidson Lab (1965), report results of free-running 
model tests. Eda and Crane (1965) employ a simplified 
version of the nonlinear equations of motion [(36), (37), 
and (38)] along with results of rotating-arm experi­ 
ments. The limited number of terrms included in the 
nonlinear equations are shown in Table 4.


><..


.,.


,;
1J
r-
6P
,O


a:<I: 
)


S
t
e
a
d
y 
t
u
r
n
i
n
g 
d
i
a
m
e
t
e
r
s 
a
s 
a 
f
u
n
c
ti
o
n 
o
f 
h
u
ll 
c
o
n
­


O , ..,Op - L/T•l45


1 figuration taken from these 
sources (at a constant rud­



w	,._
:iE-05.,_ .. --



_._ 	


(al ,.W_ 
ITHOUT..R...U._DDE
R  AND.,P_ 
ROPELLER ,
 	 	 	 


111


der angle 
of 30 deg) 
are 
compared 
in Table 
29 with 
two 
results 
predicted 
from 
linear 
theory 
Equation


mo----------------- --


(26a). The first linear theory result uses the experi­


L/T • 23.0	L/T • 18.75

 	 


ii mental derivative values 
given in Tables 6(a)2 and 27.


0....-.


&"'1"1


_, --


311


d
e
r
i
v
a
ti
v
e 
v
a
l
u
e
s 
g
i
v
e
n 
i
n 
T
a
b
l
e 
6
(
a
)l 
a
n
d 
2
7
. 
[
T
h
e


-o.5 ='•'••' 2,1,J'k",,1-,-1----	I   I
 
..<
.   ......  L/T	• 14.5



/S•,/ .



2 C1 81L


-	partial derivative 
or' Io6R of Table 6(a) is 
related to
DIL at 6R = 30 
deg in Table 29 
by the expression,


-1.oO JS....---.... 	


...,.,,.<,,..bl_WI_T_H_RY._'D_DE_R_AN_D..
,,P.,,_,RO,--PE_L_L_ER_,
0.20	0.25
t:;, • MASS COEFFICIENT


2
DIL 
= or'	30 .]
-x­


Fig. 177 Stability index 6, as a function of mass coefficient I::.', Series 60


o6R	57.3


3-40	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




1.0 -- -------------
















6	7	8	9	10
TURNING DIAMETER D /L
Fig. 178 Speed reduction in a turn as  a function of  turning diameter and 
hull configuration


In the case of the block-coefficient variation, all sources 
except the second linear theory agree that an increase 
in block coefficient significantly improves turning. Ex­ 
amination of Equation 26(a) and of the experimental 
derivative values in Table 6(a)2 shows that the de­ 
crease in turning diameter with increasing C0 is as­ 
sociated with two factors:
1	The reduction in the stability criterion C.
2	The large increase in N' 6 and Y'6 •
Of these two factors, the first is the  more imp rtant. 
The second factor is caused by the more highly loaded 
propeller on a single-screw (C0 = 0.80) ship compared 
to a single-screw (C8 = 0.60) ship as shown in Fig. 128. 
Because the theoretical  method  developed  in Section 
9 ignores propeller interaction, the results of the sec­
ond linear theory shown in Table  29 do not confirm  
the general trend. Interesting  to note is that this effect 
of block coefficient on turning would not be duplicated 
on multiple-screw ships if the rudders were not located 
in the propeller race.
  While there is some disagreement in Table 29(a) 
concerning the effect of LIB ratio on turning, both the 
trends and the magnitudes shown by the free-turning 
tests of Davidson Lab (1965) agree remarkably with 
results from the second linear theory. The opposite 
trend exhibited by the linear predictions based on the 
experimental derivatives of Table 6(a)2 is caused by 
the exceptionally poor stability of the (LIB= 7.5) 
model compared  to that of  the (LIB= 7.0) and (LI 
B = 8.0) models shown in Table 6(a)2 [see also Table 
28 and Fig. 177(b)]. This trend may be delusive, for it 
is not confirmed by the theoretical derivatives of Table 
6(a)l. It is concluded from Table 29(a) that while low 
values of LIB are favorable for turning, the effect of 
increasing the LIB ratio to very high values is also 
somewhat favorable.
As for the effect of LIT ratio, Table 29(a) again


shows remarkable agreement between the  free-turn­ 
ing results of Davidson Lab (1965) and the second 
linear theory. The improvement in turning caused by 
increasing the LIT ratio as well as by moving the 
LCG aft is associated with the impairment of  stability 
caused by these two changes as shown in Fig. 175.
  As far as the effect of profile shape is concerned, 
Table 6(a) shows that the linear theory based on the 
experimental derivatives of Table 24 exaggerates the 
favorable effect of  cutting  away stem area compared 
to the results from Davidson Lab (1965).
  The data shown in Table 29(b) taken from several 
sources and the data shown in Fig. 219 taken from 
Shiba (1960) display clearly the saturation effect 
reached as rudder area is increased. Shiba (1960) as­ 
sociates this anomaly entirely with the decrease in 
rudder aspect ratio as rudder area is increased, and 
Table 29(c) shows that the magnitudes of Y' 8 and  N'a 
do decrease for the largest rudder area. As noted in 
Section 16.2, however, this is not a necessary 
condition for the existence of the anomaly, and in  
principle  it can be encountered even when rudders of 
constant aspect ratio are increased  in area.  Further  
discussion of the important information shown in Fig. 
219 is con­ tained in Sections 17.4 and 17.5.
  Fig. 178 shows data on speed loss in a turn.  The 
data from Eda and Crane (1965) disagree quantita­ 
tively with the data from the other sources largely 
because of the very limited number of  terms included 
in their X-equation [see Table 4(a)]. The trends, how­ 
ever, from all three references do agree. For example,








1
I­
ll)
::,
a:
:z:
:I-f
z
Ill

a:








SPEED---	VAPPROACH
Fig. 179 Effect of block coefficient on speed loss in a turn







Table 28-Stability Index as a Function of Mass Coefficient and L/T Ratio
----With propeller and rudder-----. 
Davidson	I	Stability index, 0- 1		I 
Laboratory		Theory	Exper.
Model	Table	Equation	Table




r::-Without propeller and rudder--, Davidson	,Stability index 0- 1-, Laboratory		Theory
	Exper.
Model	Table	Table


Ii'


C
s	LIB


L
I
T


L
C
G
/
L


N
o.	6(a)l	(128)	6(a)2


N
o.	6(b)l	6(b)2


0.150
0.160
0.171
0.171
0.171
0.200
0.200
0.229


0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.60
0.70
0.80


8.0
7.5
7.0
7.0
7.0
6.0
7.0
7.0


18.75
18.75
14.50
18.75
23.00
18.75
18.75
18.75


0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
0.016
O.o16
0.016


0.515
0.515
0.515
0.515
0.515
0.515
0.505
0.475


4,1,1	-0.61	-0.63	-0.56
1,1,1	-0.59	-0.58	-0.41
6,1,1	-0.76	-0.73	-0.52
2,1,1	-0.55	-0.54	-0.51
5,1,1	-0.33	-0.42	-0.45
3,1,1	-0.41	-0.45	-0.42
7,1,1	-0.35	-0.41	-0.31
8,1,1	-0.33	-0.32	-0.28


4,0,0
1,0,0
6,0,0
2,0,0
5,0,0
3,0,0
7,0,0
8,0,0


-
0.20
-
0.20
-
0.38
-
0.15
+0.0
75
-
0.03
+0.0
3
+0.0
05


-
0.26
N.A
.
-
0.22
-
0.09
-
0.04
5
+0.1
9
+0.0
7
+0.0
3






Table 30-Computed ZigZag Maneuver Responses as Functions of Ship Configuration [from Eda and Crane (1965)]
(L = 152 m (500 ft), V = 14.8 kts, 6. = 20 deg)
Over­ 
shoot 
Width



n
0z
;11;1
0,-



 Davidson 
Laboratory



Stability


N 		'a



Time to 1st Exec



Yaw-Angle Overshoot, deg
 

of Path,


-Reach­ Time	Dist



Period


;V:i:'


Series
Rudder Area,
A'T
Block coefficient,
Cs
Draft, LIT

Profile Shape 
cutaway
  bow cutaway 
Section Shape


Model


Variation


Index o-1


/', - N',


sec


1st	2nd	3rd


Yo/L
1st


sec


xRIL


sec






267


342	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 29(a)-Values of Steady Turning Diameter as a Function of Hull Configuration for Single-Screw Ships From Four
Different Sources (A'11 = 0.016 and 811 = +30 deg)
---------Hull Configuration---------	---Turning Diameter/Ship Length---





LIB




LIT




LCGIL


Profile 
Sh pe 
Bow	Stem
cutaway,
	
cutaway,
Pct
	
Pct
note 1





Section 
Shape 
note 2




Free-
Turning 
Tests
note 3
	no
te 4




Nonlinear 
Theory note 
5



Li
ne
ar 
T
he
or
y
Equation 
(26a) note 
6
	n
ote 3



0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
5.1
5.3
7.5
4.3
5.6
0.70
7.0
18.75
0.505
0.15
0.97
Normal
4.2
3.7
6.3
2.6
4.1
0.80
7.0
18.75
0.475
0.15
0.97
Normal
3.3
2.75
5.25
1.9
4.8
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.505
0.15
0.97
Normal



4.5
5.8
0.70
7.0
18.75
0.505
0.15
0.97
Normal
4.2
3.7
6.3
2.6
4.1
0.80
7.0
18.75
0.505
0.15
0.97
Normal



1.35
3.9
0.60
6.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
4.7



4.7
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
5.1
4.3
5.6
0.60
7.5
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
6.3
3.6
5.9
0.60
8.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
5.8

5.8
0.60
7.0
14.50
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
6.9

7.4

6.7
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
5.1
7.5
4.3
5.6
0.60
7.0
23.00
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
4.4
7.0

4.2
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal


4.3
5.6
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.505
0.15
0.97
Normal


4.5
5.8
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.475
0.15
0.97
Normal


5.25
6.4
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
1.12
1.88
Normal
4.9




0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
1.88
Normal
4.8
2.1
0.60
7.0
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
5.1
4.3
0.60
7.5
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Normal
6.3
3.6
0.60
7.5
18.75
0.515
0.15
0.97
Vee
6.3

NOTE 1 See Table 23 for more complete description of profile shapes.
  NOTE 2 Normal section sha2es are  those corresponding  approximately  to the Series 60. Vee-shaped sections are  those 
of Davidson Laboratory Model No. 9,1,1 of Table 5.
NOTE 3 Davidson Lab (1965).
  NOTE 4 The CB and A'ft series of Shiba (1960) have the following characteristics: LIB = 7.3, LIT= 18.25, LCG not 
specified, normal section shapes, stem cutaway = 1.25 _percent LxT, and bow cutaway = 2.0 percent for CB = 0.60, 1.3 
percent for C11 = 0.70 and 0.7 percent for Cs = 0.80 (Shiba, 1960).
NOTE 5 Ecta and Crane (1965).
NOTE 6 This is really a pseudo-linear theory because it utilizes experimentally determined derivatives [Tables 6(a)2 and
271 in conjunctin with the lmear equation (26a).
:NoTE 7 This linear theory utilizes the theoretically determined derivatives of Table 6(a)l and Table 27.




the lesser speed loss in a turn resulting from increased 
Cs, as shown by Shiba (1960), is confirmed by the 
simplified nonlinear prediction of Eda and Crane (1965). 
As shown in Fig. 179, this favorable effect can be 
explained by the much steeper resistance-as-a-func­ 
tion-of-speed curve of high-block-coefficient ships, on 
the assumption that the added drag in a turn does not 
change with increase in block coefficient.
  On the other hand, the lesser speed loss in a turn 
resulting from a decrease in draft (increase in  LIT 
ratio) as shown by the data  of  Eda and  Crane (1965) 
in Fig. 178 is directly associated with the decrease in 
drag in a turn caused by the decreased draft.
  Computed values of l/J, and ti,, and other parameters 
during the transient phase of a turn as a function  of 
hull configuration are shown in Fig. 180, taken from 
Eda and Crane (1965). These curves show that the


higher the turning ability of a ship, the greater is 
the reduction in the turning rate after a peak value 
is achieved early in the turn. According to Fig. 
180, the
first phase of a turn t/i cl- 0 and ti, = 0) described in
Section 6.2 is over in a very few seconds, whereas 
the second phase of a turn (i/i	0, \fr 0) lasts 
for more than three minutes for ships of this length 
and speed. In general, the trends with changes in 
hull configu­ ration exhibited in Fig. 180 confirm 
those of Table 29.
  The predictions in Fig. 180 were made for a 152-m 
(500-ft) ship running at an approach speed of 14.8 
knots. The response for ships of other lengths and 
speeds can be readily estimated from the results 
shown in the figure, in this manner:
. Time, t, sec    ts = tA X  (LAVVsA)


CONTROLLABILITY	343

Table 29(b)-Values of Steady Turning Diameter as a Function of Block Coefficient, 
Rudder Area, and Rudder Aspect Ratio for Single-Screw Ships From Four Different
Sources  [8R  = + 30 deg)
Rudder Aspect
Ratio	 		Turning Diameter/Ship Length     	
Free-Turning	Nonlinear	Linear Theory 
Tests		Theory	equation (26a)
Cs	A'R	note 8	note 8	note 3	note 4	note 5	note 6	note 7
0.60	0.012	2.50	2.33	6.9	6.8	8.5	5.3	5.6
0.60	0.016	1.90	1.75	5.1	5.3	7.5	4.3	5.6
0.60	0.020	1.40	4.5

0.70	0.012	2.33	5.0
0.70	0.016	1.90	1.75	4.2	3.7	6.3	2.6	4.1
0.70	0.020	1.40	3.2
0.70	0.025	1.12	3.1
0.70	0.0285	0.98	3.15
0.80	0.012	2.33	3.9
0.80	0.016	1.90	1.75	3.3	2.75	5.3	1.9	4.8
0.80	0.020	1.40	2.4
0.80	0.025	1.12	2.45
0.80	0.0285	0.98	2.65
  NOTE 8 The effective aspect ratio and the geometric aspect ratio of the rudders 
reported on by Eda and Crane (1965) and Shiba (1960) are identical  because, as  shown 
in Fig. 54, the rudders  are  not close enough  to the hull for it  to form a groundboard  
(see Section 14.6).


.
Angular rates, deg/sec	[


. tJA


X (L;u:)



  Predicted results show 
that turning quality is sen­ 
sitive to the fullness of a 
ship's hull and increases


where L and  U are  length  and  speed,  and subscripts 
A and B designate the original ship and the proposed 
ship, respectively; e.g., LA = 152 m ·and VA = 14.8 
knots.
  Path characteristics of the ship (longitudinal and 
lateral position in multiples of ship length, x/L and 
y/L) remain identical for the same Froude number a d 
remain generally the same regardless of changes m 
ship length and speed (on both of which Froude number 
depends). For example, advance and transfer, ADIL 
and TRIL, remain unchanged. Angles, such as ship's 
heading and drift angle do not change when results 
are scaled. The ratios, x/L and y/L, depend  weakly 
on Froude number as shown in the development of 
nonlinear equations of motions.
  The increase in turning ability with an increase in 
rudder size is clear in Fig. 180. It should be noted that 
transient turning rate behavior depends upon final 
turning ability. For a ship that has the ability to turn


appreciably with increasing block c?efficient. For or­ 
dinary ship forms, an increase of ship mass should be 
expected to improve turning quality, because of the 
destabilizing eccentricity of centrifugal force and lat­ 
eral hydrodynamic force. The changes in both inertial 
and hydrodynamic terms with block coefficient tend to 
give greater turning ability. Also, q.ui kness of re­ 
sponse with large rudder angles as mdicated by  the 
time at which peak turning occurs is little affected by 
an increase in block coefficient or ship mass.
  Hydrodynamic terms vary significantly with ship's 
draft, as expected in view of the  relation  of draft  to 
the important aspect-ratio variable in wing theory. Ac­ 
cording to response predictions, these terms, together 
with corresponding mass and inertia changes, produce 
good turning qualities for vessels that have large


quickly, the turning rate increases rapidly to a peak 
and then gradually decreases to a final steady value, 
with the greatest rates of turn taking place during the 
transient phase of the turn. Section 17 will address


Table 29-(c)


Theoretical Values of Y' 6 and N'6 for the Models of Shiba 
(1960)
acL (1/deg)


this area further. The curves for advance and transfer 
indicate a trend showing saturation of improvement 
in turning quality for relatively large rudder sizes. The 
same saturation of turning quality for large rudder 
size is also demonstrated in computation of zigzag 
maneuvers. Additional rudder area is almost always 
useful in turning.


A't	a
(Shiba, 1960)
0.012	2.33
0.016	1.75
0.020	1.40
0.025	1.12
0.0285	0.98


aa
Fig. 41
0.0475
0.038
0.0315
0.0265
0.0225


Y' 3.
Equation 47(a)
0.0326
0.0349
0.0361
0.0380
0.0368


N' a.
Equation 47(c)
-0.0163
-0.0175
-0.018
-0.019
-0.0184





•IL
6


t
R
U
D
D
E
R
 
S
I
Z
E
 
V
A
R
I
A
T
I
O
N
 
(
C
e
•
 
0
 
6
 
0
 
,
 
L
 
/
 
T
=
 
1
8
.
 
7
 
5
 
)


6
A
R
 
/
 
L
 
T
 
•
0
 
.
0
 
1
2


10	AR/LT•0016


E,.D/L


4	80


0 .8	4
RTR/L
06	AR/LT •0.0 25


2	40	Q4	2
02


0	Y;L	0



50	100	150	200



0
0 .0 1	002	0 .0 3
RELATIVE RUDDER SIZE ARIL T



DEG/SEC ,j,


BLOCK COEFFICIENT VARIATION (AR / LT • 0 .0 16 , L /T • 
18 . 7 5 )


a:	,,
;,Q


_J	1.0	a:	z


' ""
.. i



0
:::,


...	n
,n     
6	=ii


6	DEG ♦


':::,	c •0 . 60	z	....


0
◄...


 		 	   £


8
1.0	Ce•0 . 70


◄.a..:


m
(II


Q	 	0
4	80	... 0.8	4	.,,
_J	:::,	...


◄	0w


0.6


Ca• 0 .80	......	z


z	a:	Q	►
02	0	Q4	C 2
:::,
w
z	a..   0.2	0z	►


'3 0	Ytl


"'	◄>   0



;,Q


2	4	6	50	100	150	200	50	100	150	200	0◄
DRAFT  VARIATION  (C8=  0  6 0 ,  AR /  L H= 0. 0 16  )

.j,
LI  T • 23 .0	6


060	0.70	0.80	:J:
BLOCK  COEFFICIENT  Ca	=i
mn
-i
C
;,Q
m


4	-'-"=':::;;-).j,


L / T • I B. 75



LIT• 14 . 50


AD/'-
4


2	40	0.4	2




0
2	4	6	50	100	150	200



02

0
50	100	150	200



o,o





15	20	25


l./\T[RAl. DISTANCE   Y/L	TIME  I SEC	TIME I  SEC	LENG TH - DRAFT RATIO LIT
Fig. 180 Computed transient turning characteristics for various ship configurations (L = 500 ft., V = 14.8 knots, A = 30 deg) (Eda and Crane, 1965)


CONTROLLABILITY	345



.,,
3.0	..,
uz


-	3.2








-<:'.


2.8
0


3.0 tzi


2.6  <
7	-<:'.
 
1.4

1.2
l.O
3.4  ....1 'S
3.2   5 i
<(


3.0


...  0	3



2 .8 L?
3.0    z -<:'.
:":,'""''
2 .8 ;:
0 <(


---




3

3

,,3
3


5.0	5.5	6.0
LENGTH-BEAM  RATIO l/8


2.6
6.	t:
3

2


Fig. 181 Effect of length-beam rotio voriotion on nondimensional measures 
associated with a 35-degree-rudder starboard tum



length-draft ratio. There is little change in response, 
however, for length-draft ratios less than about 18.
  Figs. 181 and 182 show predicted variations of turn­ 
ing performance with beam-draft and length-beam ra­ 
tios for a systematic series of full form, restricted 
draft hulls as reported by Roseman (1987). These hulls 
are much more representative of curre])t full-form (Cs
>  0.80) hulls than are  the Cs = 0.80 Series 60 hulls.
The curves indicate rather small variations of turning 
performance with length-beam ratio. Variation of turn­ 
ing performance with beam-draft ratio for these forms 
is larger, with the best turning performance occurring 
for beam-draft ratios near 3.5. The worst turning per­ 
formance occurs for the maximum (and extreme) 
beam-draft ratio of 4.5.
  Table 30 shows computed zigzag maneuver re­ 
sponses as functions of hull configuration, from Eda 
and Crane (1965). Parameter, N l(I: - N ), used by 
Arentzen and Mandel (1960) is introduced in this table. 
It is a convenient index of rudder effectiveness related 
to the inertia of the ship and its hydrodynamic added 
inertia. The rudder area and the profile-shape series 
of Table 30 show that both stability and rudder effec­ 
tiveness improve with increased rudder area and with 
decreased stern cutaway. According to the findings of 
Arentzen and Mandel (1960) as reported in Section 5.3, 
these attributes conflict as far as their influence on 
time to execute and yaw-angle overshoot is concerned, 
but the overshoot width of path should decrease as 
both of these attributes increase.  The results shown in 
Table 30 are entirely consistent with these findings. In 
the block-coefficient series, the stability is de­ 
creased with increased Cs, but the control effective­ 
ness of the (Cs= 0.80) is much better than the


1.')Q	3.50	4.00	4.50 2
BEAM-DRAFT ·.ATIO, 8/T
Fig. 182 Effect of beam-draft ratio variation an nondimensional measures 
associated with a 35-degree-rudder starboard turn


(CB= 0.70) or the (CB= 0.60) models. According to 
Arentzen and Mandel (1960), both of these features 
should decrease time to execute and increase the ov­ 
ershoot yaw angle but they conflict as far as the ov­ 
ershoot width of path is concerned. Again, these 
findings are confirmed in Table 30.
  In summary, it is concluded from this section and 
from Section 16.3 that for single-screw merchant 
ships:
  (a)	Increasing the block coefficient, LIT ratio, or 
stern cutaway area, or decreasing the LIB ratio im­ 
pairs stability, improves turning, and decreases the 
time to change heading a specified number of 
degrees.
  (b)	Increasing the block coefficient or increasing 
the stern cutaway area increases the yaw-angle 
overshoot.
  (c)	Increasing the stern cutaway area increases the 
overshoot width of path.
  (d)	Changing block coefficient or the LIT ratio 
has an indecisive effect on overshoot path width, 
and changing the latter ratio also has an indecisive 
effect on the over-shoot yaw angle.
  (e)	Changes in section shape from normal to ex­ 
treme V exert a very minor influence on all maneu­ 
vering characteristics.
  (/) If the initial rudder area is small, increasing the 
rudder area will improve stability, reduce turning di­ 
ameter, decrease the time to change heading, 
decrease the overshoot width of path, and have an 
indecisive effect on overshoot yaw angle; but if the 
initial rudder area is large, some of the preceding 
effects may be reversed with a further increase in 
rudder area.
  16.5	Comparison with Existing Vessels and Simple 
Predidlon Equations. Early in concept design, poten-


346	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




!,2.(&CT II & I. I
••L


SINGLE 
SCREW 
SHIPS






,0





I

00 ----------- -------------' !.!,2racTUAI.I

Fig. 183 Nondimensional values of  steady  turning diameter  (STD) and  tac- 
tical diameter (TD) for single-screw ships (Lyster, 1979)



tial controllability faults should be investigated by re­ 
viewing the capabilities of similar vessels. Available 
trials or model test data for maneuvers such as turns, 
zigzags, spirals, and crash stops for an existing ship 
that geometrically resembles very closely a proposed 
design can be used to estimate maneuvering perform­ 
ance. The data must be for the correct speed-length 
ratio or Froude number, and the existing ship must 
closely approximate the proposed design in all impor­ 
tant geometric characteristics, including:
  •	Block coefficient


•	Length-to-beam and beam-to-draft ratios
  •	Longitudinal center of submerged lateral plane 
area as percent of length from the forward perpen­ 
dicular
•	Rudder area divided submerged lateral area
  •	Same number of propellers and rudders, same 
types of rudders, and very nearly the same relative 
placement of propellers and rudders.
  Even with all the foregoing characteristics 
identical, variations in the stern lines or amount of 
cutaway at the stern can result in markedly different 
performance.



Table 31-General vessel hull form coefficients
Typical Form Coefficients 
and Ratios
 
Speed	Number of	Rudder	DCcnamic
                                         V,		Froude	Propellers/		Area		ourse 
Vessel Type	Ca	LIB	BIT	knots	No. V/.Jg'L		Rudders	Ratios"	Stabilityb
Harbor tug	0.50	3.3	2.1	10	0.25	1/1	0.025	s
Tuna seiner	0.50	5.5	2.4	16	0.31	1/1	0.025	s
Car ferry	0.55	5.1	4.5	20	0.34	2/2	0.020	s·
Container high speed	0.55	8.3	3.0	28.5	0.53	2/2	0.015	s
Container high speed	0.55	8.3	3.0	28.5	0.53	2/1	0.025
Car!R, liners	0.58	6.9	2.4	21	0.29	1/1	0.015
RO	0	0.59	6.9	3.0	22	0.26	1/1	0.015
Barge carrier	0.64	7.5	2.9	19	0.20	1/1	0.015
Container Med. Speed	0.70	7.1	2.8	22	0.25	1/1	0.015
Offshore suppl)i	0.71	4.7	2.75	13	0.28	2/2	0.016	Sd.•
General  cargo ow speed	0.73	6.7	2.4	15	0.20	1/1	0.015
Lumber low speed	0.77	6.7	2.6	15	0.20	1/1	0.025


LNG (125 000 m3
OBO (Panamax)


0.78	6.8	3.7	20	0.20	1/1	0.015	u
0.82	7.5	2.4	16	0.17	1/1	0.018	u


OBO  (150 000 dwt)	0.85	6.4	2.4	15	0.15	1/1	0.017	u
OBO (300 000 dwt)	0.84	6.0	2.5	15	0.14	1/1	0.015	u
Tanker (Panamax)	0.83	7.1	2.4	15	0.16	1/1	0.015	u
Tanker 100 000 to
350 000 dwt	0.84	6.2	2.4	16	0.15	1/1	0.015
ud,•
" Not for desiFen guidance.
b U = unstab e course stability; S = stable course stability.
   Although the vessel is directionally stable, maneuvering is difficult at low speeds when the propeller wash is not effective 
over the rudder.
d Maneuverability is good owing to installation of Kort nozzles, flanking rudders, and other capabilities.
•	Twin screw because of restricted draft.


CONTROLLABILITY	347




5





4


!!!.
0;::
...... 3
9
.I!
..




....
",


/

    
 




.,,_















I STAil£ I




rc,.0.,




4	5	6	'	g	10
LENGTH-to-BEAM  RATIO (L/B}
Fig, 184 Dynamic stability boundaries for various hull geometries (Clarke, 1977)


  Table 31 summarizes various vessel types and pre­ 
sents a guide for "nominal" hull form coefficients and 
geometric proportions. As a rule of thumb, a variation 
from the norms of 10 percent either way would not 
vitiate the proportions. If the contemplated design has 
proportions or characteristics outside the range of 
those vessels considered normal, the designer should 
immediately plan to undertake additional studies to
assure adequate maneuverability.	 	




- 35.8 S h (ST - 1)
SpCh	As
+  3.82   LT   (ST  -   2)  +  7.79 LT
+ o.10(f - 1) !:) (ST-	1)
TTD +


  For normal ships the designer can also make prelim­ 
inary estimates of maneuvering characteristics 
through a number of approximation methods and thus


A::= 0.519


1,33


see if his design presents the likelihood of meeting 
desired needs. Lyster (1979) developed some empirical


= 0.497 1J: - 0.065


estimating equations for ship turning characteristics 
based on regression of statistical data for both twin­ 
and single-screw ships. The equations are useful in the 
early design process since they require the nondimen­ 
sional parameters of only major characteristics, which
are estimated early on. In developing the relationships,


;: = 0.074 1J: + 0.149
(b)	Twin-Screw Vessels
STD	C8	B	Trim 	1


characteristic data from a number of ships are plotted, 
and coefficients for the equations are obtained through


L	= 0.72-7	19716RI + 4.65I + 41.0--r-+ 
18816RI


regression techniques. A typical  plot  of  relationships 
is shown in Fig. 183. The corresponding predictor equa­ 
tions for steady turning diameter (STD) along with 
predictor equations for advance, transfer, and reduced 
velocity ratio (sometimes called speed loss, although 
"speed remainder" would be more accurate) deter­ 
mined as linear functions of STD are as follows:
(a)	Single-Screw Vessels
STD=        _ 203Cs	Trim_ 13.0B 194
L	.	6R	+ .	L	L	+ SR


SpCh	VA	As
-  218   LT  (NR -  1) + 3.20   L   + 25.56 LT
1J: = 0.140 + 1.000 S D 
TAD   = 1.100  + o.514TTD
Ty-R	-0.357  +  0.531 T,L'D


348	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE







•	;:
:
.::.I



 
5. 
5	6 .0	6.5	7 .o	7.5	,.o
l / 1 
IATI
O

Fi
g. 
18
5 
Ex
a
m
pl
e 
BI
T 
ve
nu
s 
LI
B 
dy
na
mi
c 
co
ur
se 
sta
bil
ity 
gu
id
e




;
:
 
=
 
0
.
5
4
3
 
+
 
0
.
2
8
 


±
 
8
R
 
i
s
 
R
u
d
d
e
r
 
a
n
g
l
e
,
 
d
e
g
r
e
e
s
 
(
n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
 
i
f
 
t
o
 
s
t
a
r
­
 
b
o
a
r
d
)
B
 
i
s
 
B
e
a
m
 
m
o
l
d
e
d
A
8
 
i
s
 
S
u
b
m
e
r
g
e
d
 
b
o
w
 
p
r
o
f
i
l
e
 
a
r
e
a
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
e
d
 
p
o
s
i
t
i
v
e
 
i
f
 
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
i
n
g
 
f
o
r
w
a
r
d
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
r
­
 
w
a
r
d
 
p
e
r
p
e
n
d
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
a
n
d
 
n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
 
i
f
 
c
o
r
r
e
­
 
s
p
o
n
d
i
n
g
 
t
o
 
'
c
u
t
a
w
a
y
'
 
a
s
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
s
e
 
o
f
 
a
 
c
o
n
v
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
r
a
k
e
d
 
s
t
e
m
T
i
s
 
D
r
a
f
t
 
o
n
 
t
r
i
a
l
T
L
 
i
s
 
D
e
s
i
g
n
 
l
o
a
d
 
d
r
a
f
t
V
A
 
i
s
 
V
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
 
o
f
 
a
p
p
r
o
a
c
h
,
 
 
k
n
o
t
s
 
V
T
 
i
s
 
V
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
 
o
n
 
s
t
e
a
d
y
 
t
u
r
n
,
 
k
n
o
t
s
 
S
 
i
s
 
S
p
a
n
 
o
f
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
i
s
 
C
h
o
r
d
 
o
f
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
C
i
r
c
l
e
S
T
D
 
i
s
 
S
t
e
a
d
y
 
t
u
r
n
i
n
g
 
d
i
a
m
e
t
e
r
T
D
 
i
s
 
T
a
c
t
i
c
a
l
 
d
i
a
m
e
t
e
r
A
D
 
i
s
 
A
d
v
a
n
c
e
 
 
a
t
 
 
9
0
 
d
e
g
 
o
f
 
t
u
r
n
T
R
 
i
s
 
T
r
a
n
s
f
e
r
 
a
t
  
9
0
 
d
e
g
 
o
f
 
t
u
r
n
  V
	
V
A
 
i
s
 
R
e
d
u
c
e
d
 
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
 
r
a
t
i
o
 
o
n
 
s
t
e
a
d
y
 
t
u
r
n
 
T
h
e
 
w
e
i
g
h
t
e
d
 
f
a
c
t
o
r
 
(
f
 
-
 
1
)
 
(
S
T
 
-
 
1
)
i
s
 
i
n
c
l
u
d
e
d
 
t
o
 
t
a
k
e
 
a
c
c
o
u
n
t 
o
f
 
t
h
e
  
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
c
e
  
i
n
 
s
i
z
e
 
t
h
a
t 
w
a
s
 
f
o
u
n
d
 
t
o
 
e
x
i
s
t 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
 
c
i
r
c
l
e
s
 
t
o
 
p
o
r
t 
a
n
d
 
c
i
r
c
l
e
s
 
t
o
 
s
t
a
r
b
o
a
r
d
 
i
n
 
s
i
n
g
l
e
-
s
c
r
e
w
 
v
e
s
s
e
l
s
 
w
i
t
h
 
o
p
e
n


Where in English units:
STis Stern type (ST=l for closed stern; ST=2 
for open water stern)
NR is Number of rudders
L is Length between perpendiculars, ft
Cs is Block coefficient


water sterns. The difference was found to depend not 
only on the direction of rotation of the propeller, but 
also on the fractional draft, T/TL, and to be markedly 
greater at light drafts than at deep ones (see Section 
13.2). The circle to port tends to be smaller in ships 
with right-handed propellers. The single-screw ships 
from which the data were obtained all had right-






4.



...
'
g
i



3.8



3.6



0	3.4


3.2



3.0


0 . 78	0.7'1	0.80	0.81	0.82	0.83	O. IM	0.85	0.86
•	llOCK COEFFICIENT. c1
fig. 186 Maximum bea m-draft ratio vs. block coefficient for LIB = 5.0 (Roseman, Ge rtler , and Kuhl, 197 )



.....








Rh mer lfACI I ,... ,.,.1
6 TIIAL DISPUCflEIT I To11Ms1


CONTROLLABILITY	349
-


J.2••·-
61/3


P, ASTEU •SENIEI. DEAi 111 IATEI I Metrtc I
d PICWUfl tlMfTH IinetenJ
\I,. Jiff Al 5Pf ■ 11.. t,J


,,.,.


• .,• .....	..
-


...


i--"' -·	+
,,..	>t fJS, llfZ................... 457J(flllllfJ
Iii   MITIII -
IEI.. 
...,c.o2SIIWl1E
/
•	• TAIIEI I. ................... lltU/llfSfl )


• +

" /	,..


T    JMllfl   II...................tN    Cfllll•J
G)  JMIEI A•. .•.. •  •.•.   ..• •. •• •  129643 /JIHfL J
t:	: ::::::::::::::::::: :::	::;
I	I	I
'·"'   .3042Y•3   /:;,.	,.....


Fig. 187 Universal stopping curve for tankers (Clarke, 197n




handed propellers, except for a possible few in which 
the direction of rotation was not known.
  Eda (1974) and Fedyayevskly (1964) also have 
methods for calculating approximate turning diame­ 
ters early in design. These turning circle characteris­ 
tics are useful in obtaining limiting values and 
comparisons of what may be possible. Further studies 
are necessary to assure that these capabilities can be 
obtained and to assure good coursekeeping and turn­ 
ing abilities.
  Use of a fullness criterion during early design can 
provide a guide to potential acceptability of the basic 
hull proportions. Fig. 184 from Clarke (1977) shows 
boundaries of stability of a particular hull and appen­ 
dage configuration for C8 varying from 0.6 to 0.8. 
From this figure the degree of stability of a proposed 
vessel design can be approximated if basic dimensions 
are known. The diagram applies only to the one hull 
form but indicates general trends. Stability is sensitive 
to many properties such as hull shape, rudder effec­ 
tiveness, and speed. Based on these trends, designers 
can use as a guide plots such as  Fig. 185 showing 
BIT versus LIB of existing vessels for particular ship 
type and size groups. When the shape of the curves


their paper, illustrates how candidate designs can be 
compared with known models or ships. Falling 
above the trend indicates a potential for 
controllability trou­ ble. Such an indication by itself 
does not mean that with proper attention to design of 
hull form and rudder an acceptable design cannot be 
achieved. It merely forewarns that special attention 
may become neces­ sary.
  Figs. 187 and 188, adapted from Clarke (1977) 
are useful in estimating tanker stopping distances. 
Fig. 188 can be derived from Fig. 187, and indicates 
the relationship of stopping distance to approach 
speed and reverse power. The time contours on Fig. 
188 in­ dicate the number of minutes required for 
each stop­ ping maneuver. Information such as that 
provided on
... 	
,., 	
JI Ill
,.,
JS 1115

1.,


for Fig. 184 are applied to Fig. 185, one can conclude, 
for instance, that existing bulk carriers of LIB = 6, 
while adequate in real piloted conditions, are most 
likely  inherently  unstable.  Those  existing   with 
LIB = 7.5, on the other  hand, can probably  tolerate 
a larger BIT than indicated to have an equivalent 
capability. With existing vessel data, the designer can 
thus surmise at an early stage whether a design can
attain a  reasonable  range of course stability without


,.,
,.,	  
,.,


1111111


the addition of skegs or special attention to the design 
of the lateral plane area. A similar fullness criterion 
was proposed by Roseman, et al (1974) in their study 
of restricted draft bulk carriers. Fig. 186 adapted from


, .....-  -i...i..  ------'..,&,.  ---'--.....--',;o.lo&.---­
If

A"'°"CI  SPffl llll•t•J

Fig. 188 Stopping curves for 210,000-dwt tanker (Clarke, 197n


 	 





the graphs of both figures is especially useful in com- 
paring contemplated vessels with existing vessels.
  16.6	An Exampl. Predid;on Method for Dynamic 
Stability.	The extent of the lateral plane (underwater 
profile of the vessel) and the position of the center of 
effort have major effects on the course stability and 
turning ability of the hull form. The equations of Ja- 
cobs (1964)and others for estimating bare hull hydro- 
dynamic derivatives based on variations in underwater 
profile (See Section 9.5) are useful for showing trends 
of dynamic stability and maneuvering performance 
even though they ignore important propeller-rudder 
effects.
  While hull resistance to motion and flow of water to 
the propeller must be considered, additions to lateral 
plane area such as those caused by rudder, deadwood, 
skegs, fins, and other appurtenances must also be eval- 
uated for their effect on stability. Skegs and fins may 
actually be added late in a design to reduce a dynamic 
stability deficiency of the hull form. Increasing the 
rudder size also helps improve the stability situation 
while, of course, helping turning ability.
  To illustrate the elements involved in a practical 
analysis, a somewhat simplified theoretical procedure 
for calculating dynamic straight-line stability devel- 
oped by Eda (1974) is presented here. It  is based  on 
the linear theory of Section 2 and is believed to be 
sufficiently accurate for design use, as in the selection 
of rudder size for a ship outside the range of empirical 
data.
This method involves predicting the hydrodynamic



derivatives using a combination of 
theoretical and em- pirical inputs. First the 
ship's  hull  is viewed as  a  fin of large area 
but very low aspect ratio. With the hull 
considered as a fin, its geometric aspect ratio 
is its draft-to-Iength ratio, its thickness-to-
chord ratio is its beam-to-Iength ratio, its 
taper ratio is usually close to 1.0, its 
sweepback angle is usually slightly negative, 
and its mean section shape  corresponds  to 
the  shape of its water plane at half draft. At 
speeds (Fn <  0.25) for which the influence 
of wavemaking may be neg- lected and the 
current approaches are few, it  was shown by 
Tsakonas (1959)that the free water surface 
serves as a groundboard for  the  ship's  hull.  
Hence, the effective aspect ratio of the hull 
may be taken as twice the geometric aspect 
ratio, that is, as 2TfL. Be- cause of the hull's 
poor section shape as a lifting sur- face and 
because of its very low aspect ratio, a ship's 
hull might be expected to generate very 
small hydro- dynamic forces and moments 
compared to its rudder; but because of its 
very large profile area, a ship's hull does in 
fact generate forces and moments that are far 
larger than the control forces  and moments 
generated by its rudder (see also Section 
3.5).
  One of the many assumptions made in 
linear theory is that the mutual interference 
effects between the ship's hull and its 
appendages such as fixed fins and rudders 
are negligible. This assumption is hard to 
jus- tify on physical grounds, and it is 
obviously not jus- tified for tight maneuvers. 
Nevertheless it and  the other assumptions 
made in the linear prediction do lead to 
reasonable correlation with experimental 
data for


CONTROLLABILITY	351
small motions within the linear range, for example, 
predicting straight-line stability (Eda and Crane, 1965). 
As developed by linear theory in Section 4.2, the 
criterion for stability is 0'\ ,2 < 0 where from Equations
(14) and (14a),


- -(-n'zv


'  -  ayr'-N') +    ( -  n z'v Y 
'  -   ayr'N  ')2  + 4A 
'n'[-Y'N'  -  (a' -


YT')NV'


(129)


CT,i


2 -	2A 'n ']
1


These coefficients can be estimated as follows:
(a) Inertial Coefficients
I!,,,' _	A	=	coefficient of added
-	p/ 2L2T	mass of the ship
=	(pLBTCB)







(130)


(Nv')BH = -(a/ - !!,,,"'') - (xp' + x,')
(Yr')BH  -   A'  = -(xp'  + x.') TT[ -	I!,,,'

k'TT [ • C.(x)t2 dx


(131)


pl2L2T

n,'  =  /,'  - N;-',


'  =  £-k4'T r•C•(x)TT t 2 x2  dx
"•


(Nr')BH  =	z. L2T	x'  -[  (;) 2  + x,'2]1
and



 
where


x' = ½f•C,(x)t2x dx/   [•   C,(x)t2 dx
z.	x.



where t = draft of local section (constant at even­ 
keel conditions)
b = breadth of local section
x., xb = respective distances of stern and bow 
from LCG (positive if forward from 
LCG)	.
Cs= two-dimensional lateral added-mass 
coefficient (section inertia coefficient) 
(see Fig. 50)
k 1, k 2, k' = three-dimensional correction factor (see
Fig. 48)


xP' = distance of center of pressure from LCG, as fraction of 
ship length (positive if forward from LCG)
x; = distance of skeg (or rudder) location from
LCG, as fraction of ship length  (negative  if aft from 
LCG, as is usual)
cP = prismatic coefficient
The relationships between these hydrodynamic coef­ ficients and 
rudder force coefficients are given by,
Yv' = (Yv')BH - Ya'


/,I pl2L4TT = moment-of-inertia coeffi­ 
cient of  added  mass of  the ship;;: A'/16
L,T = length  and  mean draft of  the ship, re­
spectively


Nv' = (Nv')BH - Ya'Xr'
Yr'  = (Yr')BH  - Ya'xr'
N'  = (N')	- Y.'x '2


(132)


(b) Linear Hydrodynamic Coefficients with rudder 
(Barehull),


As assumed in the foregoing equations, each linear 
hydrodynamic coefficient for the ship equals the al-






Table 33-lnertial Coefficients for Models 60, 60R1, and 60R2



Minor axis/major axis, 2 T/L
k1 (longitudinal)
k 2 (lateral)
k' (rotational)
t,,,', mass coefficient
t:i..,', longitudinal virtual-mass coefficient
t:i.y_', lateral virtual-mass coefficient
n,', virtual moment-of-inertia coefficient 
x/L, CG of lateral added mass from LCG 
x/L, center of area of profile from LCG


0.1067
0.022 (From Fig. 48) 0.957 
(From Fig. 48) 0.875 (From Fig. 
48) 0.171
0.175
0.341
0.0219
0.049
0.028


352	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 34-Hydrodynamic Coefficients and Stability Indexes Estimated
Model	60	60Rl	60R2
Y.'	-0.335	-0.347	-0.329


N'
Y,' - 11m'
N' r
CT1


-0.086	-0.080	-0.089
-0.095	-0.089	-0.098
-0.066	-0.069	-0.065
-0.55	-0.64	-0.49





gebraic sum of those for the bare hull and the rudder. 
The rudder force coefficient can be estimated for rud­ 
der in propeller race by Equation (133). This equation 
allows for effects of wake and propeller slip ratio on 
rudder forces by incorporating terms in w and s, re­ 
spectively,


on basic ship characteristics alone. The 
mathematical models can be used to quickly 
simulate ship capabilities to evaluate the 
effects of change in a ship's physical 
character.
  Inoue, et al (1981) provided the basis for 
practical realistic simulations at the early stages of 
design with


         1    

 


t;	their 
collection and 
parametric analysis 
of nonlinear




where


Ya' = (1 
- w)2A


\ 5 (1 
+ 
ksu)


(133)


m
o
d
e
l
 
t
e
s
t
 
d
a
t
a
.
 
I
n
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
t
h
e
y
  
a
s
s
u
m
e
d
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
n
o
n
d
i
m
e
n
s
i
o
n
a
l
 
l
a
t
e
r
a
l
 
f
o
r
c
e
 
Y
'
 
a
n
d
 
y
a
w
 
m
o
­
 
m
e
n
t
 
N
'
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
a
n
 
a
x
i
s
 
a
t
 
m
i
d
s
h
i
p
 
c
a
n
  
b
e
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d
  
a
s
,


w = mean effective wave fraction of the propeller
A = rudder aspect ratio
s=l-!!_


Y'(.8,r')  = Y,,..,'/3 + Yr'r'  + "1i1(.8,r ')
N'(.8,r') = Nfj' /3' - Nr'r' + f,.llJ,r')


(134)


Pn
P = propeller pitch
n = propeller revolutions per unit time
k = 3.36
  An example is shown for the case of the Series 60 
hull form with block coefficient 0.60, LIB = 7.0, and 
BIT = 2.68. The principal characteristics of three 
models (M-60, M-60Rl, and M-60R2) are show:p in Table
32. These models have the same hull form but different 
rudders of varying chord length. Table 33 gives the 
estimated inertial coefficients obtained in Equation 
(130).
  Linear hydrodynamic coefficients for M-60 are de­ 
termined by Equation (131). Then rudder coefficients
Y8' for the three rudders can be estimated by Equation 
(132). Hydrodynamic coefficients for Models 60Rl and


where 1,(.8,r') and f,.llJ,r') represent the 
nonlinear terms. Model tests measuring Y and 
N were performed at a Froude number of 
approximately 0.06 for three oil tankers, 
three dry cargo ships, a containership, an 
LNG carrier, a RO/RO ship, and a car 
carrier. Ap­ proximate formulas for 
estimating the linear deriva-


--		FROM LEAST 
SQUARES FIT 
OF 
EXPERIMENT
AL DATA
-	-	FROM THEORY

 
-1.0


y ,


60R2 are determined by subtracting Ya' terms due to 
the original rudder for M-60 and adding those due to 
rudders of different size for M-60Rl and M-60R2, in 
Equation (132).
  Finally, stability indexes for the three models are 
estimated by substituting all inertial and hydrody­ 
namic terms in Equation (129). Table 34 shows the 
estimated hydrodynamic coefficients and the stability 
indexes as finally determined; these are negative for 
all three models with rudders of different size. Thus, 
it is shown that all three models are dynamically stable. 
Calculated and experimental values of stability in­ 
dexes and hydrodynamic terms are compared in Figure 
189, which shows fairly good agreement between cal­






0.4
y'
0
0.2



0



0.1
N'
0


----
--------v6

r---.._>--a==A=-=--===:..=o=N'.,.
r===-==-:=-......,.:i.,   _


0.1
v',,

0






0
N',,

·0.1


culated and experimental results.	0	0
  16.7	Predidion Models Using Basic Ship Character­ 
istics.	Recently,	reasonably	good   analytical	ap­


10	20	30	40
RUDDER AREA SQ. Cm


proaches	have	been	developed	for	estimating 
mathematical model hydrodynamic coefficients based


Fig. 189 Comparison of calculated and experimental model stability 
deriY­ atives and indexes for Series 60, Models 60, 60R1, 
and 60R2


CONTROLLABILITY	353



Yp-0-SOxk
0-3	t
0-2

o. 1
csB/L



conditions at fixed displacement. Results were com­ 
pared to a theoretical approach developed using the 
slender-body theory or low-aspect-ratio lifting surface 
theory. The basic theoretical approach uses  the 
methods of Inoue and Kijima (1978) and Fuwa (1973) 
based on the slender body theory of Newman (1977). 
The following relationships show close agreement 
with the measured results:
  	  J



0	0-1	0-2
Fig. 190 The function I in equation



0,15	--:Y;:¼Jtk

 
0	0-05	0-10	0-15
Fig. 191 Derivative of lateral force in even keel condition for turning motion







(a)I
0-8



0-4


Y.a'(T) = Y.a'(0) [ 1.0 + 3
N.a'(T) = N.a'(0) [1.0 - 	:]
Y/(T) = Y/(0) [1.0 + 0.80 ;J
N/(T) = Nr'(0) [1.0 + 0.30 ;J





(137)






tives on the bare hull for full load and even keel were 
developed by applying lifting surface theory:
Y,/ = 1 11'k + f(CBBIL)
Yr'  = 1 11'k




0


(b)
o.s




0-05	0-10	0-15
1
--(1-Ca)· Bid


4
N/	=k
2


(135)




0-4


Nr' = 0.54k - k
where  function  f (C8  BI L ) as  shown  in  Fig. 190  was 
necessary to account for the different hull types. Fig. 
191 is typical of the test results and shows the rela­ 
tively good agreement in the relationships for the var­ 
ity of models tested.
  The  nonlinear  terms /y(/3,r')   and f .	r') were as­ 
sumed to depend on /32 /3R' and r ' 2 in application of


0-2


0



(c)









-Y ,





0-05	0-10	0,15
-Cl-Ca>·e,a


,
cross-flow theory or Newtonian law. With additional 
review of the  data the following formulation  was used:
fy = Y.a.a/31/31 + Y.ar/3lr'I + Yrrr'lr'I	(136)
IN = Nrrr'lr'J + (Nrrpr' + Nppr/3)/3r'
Fig. 192 shows the resultant fit for Y1111 , Y11 r1 and Yrr• 
Thus, hydrodynamic forces acting on a bare  hull can  
be estimated by using Equations (135) and 136).
Further model tests were performed with stern trim


0-10	I
0-05


0	0-10	10•15
-U-Ca>·e1d
Fig. 192 Nonlinear derivatives of lateral force


354	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



 (a)	-N'rr 
0-06
0-04

0,02

0
-N'u,











0,1










 -Ca·B/L 
0,2


where lp  = 
kl[ 'TTk  +  
f (C8  BI L)]
The 
nonlinear 
terms are 
derived 
from Fig. 
193.
  Inoue et 
al (1981) 
presented 
a complete 
practical 
calculation 
method 
based on 
the 
foregoing 
and  on 
other 
works. 
Their 
method 
allows 
calculation 
of ma­ 
neuvering 
motions 
using only 
the 
principal 
particulars 
of the ship 
hull, 
propeller, 
and rudder 
as known 
at the 
initial 
design 
stage. The 
basic 
equations 
used are

Surge 
force: 
A.(u - 
vr) = 
Xn + 
xp + 
XR


(bl

0,6

0-4

0,2









-
Ce
·B/
L


Sway 
force: 
A.(v + 
ur) = 
Yn + 
YR
Yaw 
torque
: /,,;.  
= N8    
+ NR
Roll 
torque: 
/,,,,"rp 
= Kn 
+ KR
Propul
sion 
torque: 
2TTlpp
n = 
QE + 
Qp




(139
)


0
(c)	N',,11
0.1


0


0,1	0,2



0,4
1


where 
the 
subscrip
ts H, P, 
and R 
refer to 
the hull, 
propelle
r, and 
rudder, 
respecti
vely, 
and  XP,  
Qp, and 
QE 
represen
t 
propelle
r thrust, 
propelle
r torque, 
and 
engine 
torque, 
respecti
vely. 
The 
coupling  
effects 
due to 
roll are 
included 
and 
consider
ed 
importa
nt for 
high­ 
speed 
containe
r 
carriers 
and 
others.
Longit
udinal 
forces 
acting 
on the 
ship are 
written,


-Ce·-n
-0.1

Fig. 193 Nonlinear derivatives of yow moment


Xn  =  -A.,,u  + (A.y + Xvr)vr + 
X(u).	(140)
Added  inertia  terms  A.,, and  Ay (and  J..  in 
Equation
(140) can be estimated from the charts 
proposed by Motora (1960). When the 
quantity (A.II + xvr) is re­ written as cmA.y, 
then Cm may have an approximate
value in the interval 0.50 to 0.75 
(Yoshimura and Nom­ oto, 1978),  to  
provide a  good estimation  for the entire


where Tm is mean draft of the ship, r is the trim
quantity (positive by stern), and lP = Np(0)I Yp'(0).
  The formulas resulting from combining Equations 
137, 136, and 135 into 134 provide a method of esti­ 
mating hydrodynamic forces acting on a given ship 
form as a function of its draft, trim, and aspect ratio:


second term. The third term represents ship 
resistance as a function of speed (see Chapter VI, 
Vol II).
The propeller thrust XP and the propeller torque Qp
can be written
Xp = (1 -   tl'O) • pn 2D4 K/..,Jp)	(141)


Y'  = [   TTk + f (C8  BI L)]( 1 + 3
+ TTk ( 1 + 0.8 ;-Jr'



j /3


Qp = -2TTJppn - pn 
2D5 KQ(Jp)
The thrust coefficient K/..,Jp) 
and the torque coefficient KiJP) 
can be computed from the 
propeller character­ istic curves  
as  functions  of  the  advance  
constant, JP
= u(l  -   Wp)l(nD). The effective 
propeller wake frac­


+ Ypp/Jl/31 + Ypr/3lr'I + Y rr'lr'I
N' = k(l - 0.27 r_\13
lp   T:)

-(0.54k - k2)(1 + 0.30 ;-Jr'




(138)


tion Wp, which is defined with the concept 
of the pro­ peller thrust identity, may vary 
from that in the straight running condition. 
Hirano (1980) proposed the following 
estimating formula,
Wp = wPO exp(K1/3i),	(142)
where K1 = -4.0, and [3p = /3 - xp'r'.


The lateral force and the yaw moment, Y8 and N8 ,
                   can be written as,


CONTROLLABILITY	355


NH= -J ..r + NHO(v,r) +Nm(v,r,cp)
+ [Y HO(v,r) + Y m(v,r,cp)]x•.


(143)


The hydrodynamic force induced on ship 
hull by rudder action is described in the 
form of aHFN cos 6. The coefficient aH 
can be estimated based on some model 
experimental results, which suggest that 
aH may be expressed as a function of C8 
after Hirano (1980). The rudder  normal 
force FN    can be written in the form


  Where the terms YHO(v,r) and N HO(v, r) represent the 
undamental force and moment, each of which play an 
important part in the ship maneuvering motion. Inoue


F N	1 P,.6.13 A A
2 25


R Tr72R sm•


aR.	(147)


et al (1981) express these terms as.
YH (v,r ) = 1 pL dV2[Y v'v' + Y;r' +Y vv'IZv'I


where the effective rudder inflow speed 
and angle, VR
and aR, are calculated as follows,
VR  =  V(l  -    wR)[l + K20(s)]½	(148)


= Y 11v'rl


' I + Y1111r 'rl


'I]



(144)


with  K2 = 1.065 
for  the  port  
rudder  and  K2 = 
0.935
for the starboard 
rudder and wR is 
the effective 
rudder


N   (v  r) = 1	2


2
	w
ake fraction. 
The term K20(s) 
represents the 
effect


HO      1	2- pL dV2[N v'v' + Nr'r' + N' vvr v' r '


of the propeller slipstream on VR, and
g(s)  = T7K[2  -   (2  -    K)s]s/(1 -   
s)2	(149)


where



Yv' = 
[a1k 
+ 
f(CBB
IL)](l 
+ 
b1T')
Y
r
'
 
=
 
a
2
k
(
l
 
+
 
b
2
T
'
 
)
 
N
v
'
 
=
 
a
3
k
(
l
 
+
 
b
3
T
'
 
)







(100)


where



s = 1 
- u(l - 
Wp)l(
nP)
11=
DIH
K = 
0.6(1 - 
Wp)/(1 
- WR)


N;   = (a4k + a5k2)(1 + b4T' )
k = 2d/L
7' = Tld
and a:i, a2, • • • , b1, b2, • • • etc. are constants. Esti­ 
mate charts, as functions  of the principal dimensions  
of ship hull, are given by Inoue et al. (1981).
  The terms Ym(v,r,cp) and Nm(v,r,cp) represent the 
added terms due to inclusion of the roll effect and can 
be estimated as shown by Hirano and Takashina (1980). 
The roll moment acting on ship hull can be written

KH = -Jxx - N( )
W · GZ(cp) - YH • ZH. (145)
The coupling effect due to the horizontal motions on 
the motion of roll is reflected in the form of YH • zH. 
The vertical distance zH (from G to the point on which 
YH acts) can  be  estimated,  following  Inoue (1979),  as 
a function of Cb.
  Rudder forces and moments, including the hydro­ 
dynamic forces and moments induced on ship hull by 
rudder action, can be written in the following form,
XR = -FNsin 6


Estimation of the effective rudder wake fraction is 
made on the assumption that
          wRIWRo = WplWpo = exp(K1 /3i) .	(150)
The effective rudder wake fraction wRo of full-scale 
ships may be obtained from the results of the model 
experiments in the same manner as for the effective 
propeller wake fraction Wpo in ship propulsion, that is, 
by making use of the technique of estimating the full­ 
scale value from the model experimental results while 
applying the concept of wake ratio.
  The effective rudder inflow angle, with the flow-
rec­ tifying effect taken into consideration, can be ex­ 
pressed in the form
aR  = 6R+  60 -   y/3'R	(151)
where  /3R'  is defined  as  /3R'    =   /3  -   2x'Rr'. The flow­ 
rectifying effect may be considered to be developed 
from separate hull and propeller effects with the flow­ 
rectification coefficient y written as
y  = Gp · Cs,	(152)
where
Gp = 1/[1 + 0.611(2 - 1.4s)s/(1 - s)2]½
and


YR = -(1 + ay)FN cos 6
NR = -(1 + aH)xRFN cos 6

 



(146)


Cs=  K3/3'R  for	/3'R < 
C80/ K3
Cs = Cso   for	/3'R  >  Cs0  
I R
with  K 3    = 0.45,    and	Cso = 
0.5.


356	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




   
Fig. 194 Illustration of course changing maneuver with rudder angle of
1s·1r

  The following torque characteristics are used for 
the main engines:
Slow speed diesel engine
QE = IQPI for  IQPI	QEMAX	(153)
QE = QEMAX for IQPI > QEMAX•
Steam turbine
QE  = SHP/(27rn).
  Computed results by Inoue et al (1981) for seven 
typical ships of different types were developed to verify 
the accuracy of the method through comparisons with 
full-scale trial results. The available data were  for 
ships under ballast conditions except for one ULCC at


with all of the full-scale trials in regard both to 
turning trajectory and to time history of heading 
angle, ship speed, and propeller rotational speed.
  This model, and models of many others using the 
same basic concepts, for example, those of Mikelis 
(1985) and NSMB (1984) can be applied in the earliest 
stages of design, with good results to be expected. 
Predicted maneuvering performance can then be sim­ 
ulated for comparison with other vessels of known 
design needs or of demonstrated performance.
  Beyond predictions of the standard definitive ma­ 
neuvers in deep water, mathematical models can be 
used for many other tasks. Inoue et al (1981) extended 
their model, for instance, to providing estimates of 
turning circle and course changing abilities at different 
drafts and trim. Their formulae become especially use­ 
ful when one needs estimates of capabilities under 
loading conditions different from those of actual trials 
or physical model tests. Course changing abilities were 
also analyzed by evaluating the effect of applying rud­ 
der angle and then  corrective  rudder  (angles  15 and 
17 deg) as in Fig. 194. The course changing ability is 
generally described with the indices of lf,2 and DN with 
computed results for the container vessel and tanker 
shown in Fig. 195. Estimation formulae derived  to 
show the effect of loading are as follows:
lf,2(Ballast) = (1 - A5d *)(l - B5r * )


full load and one VLCC at both full load and ballast. 
The computed results show satisfactory agreement


(1 + C5a*)  • l/12 (Full)	( l


5 4)






FULL
BALLAST  ( 1)
BALLAST ( 2)
BALLAST  ( 3)

...J....
z
Q







.....J...
Q



-;.
•


4	4
...;;
3	0...,	3


N	N
80	2	80	2

80	80


40	0	40	0

20	20


0	0
15	30	45 '¥1 (dtgl	15	30	45 "', (d•g>
Fig. 195 Computed results of new course distance and new course angle for a containership and a tanker (Inoue et al., 1981)


CONTROLLABILITY	357




 
where  the  coefficients As, A6•     etc.  can  be  determined 
from Fig. 196. These approximation formulae may 
have practical utility at sea as well as in design anal- 
ysis.
  Hirano et al (1987) further extended this model to 
account for lateral thruster forces, wind forces, wave 
drifting forces, and other forces such as  those  from 
tugs or mooring lines. Shallow water and bank effects 
are also addressed by applying correction factors to 
various coefficients. The resulting model with graphi- 
cal output can generate plots useful in meeting IMO 
requirements for  publishing  maneuvering  booklets 
and posting information, as well as in design compar- 
ison studies. Other derivable information, such as helm 
angles to check course (see Fig. 197) under specified 
wind conditions, can be of practical help to the mariner.



  16.8	Model Testing and Advanced Mathematical 
Models.	Given only  the  principal  characteristics  of 
the ship design, the mathematical models described in 
the previous section can produce  a  usable  prediction 
of maneuverability. Once the hull form shape is de- 
fined, however, it is desirable to refine the analysis in 
order to predict maneuvering capability with greater 
assurance.
  If the design uses the hull form, appendages, and 
rudder(s) from an existing maneuvering model test 
series, coefficients are available from the series  with- 
out further testing. The Series 60 data of Todd (1963) 
and the wide-beam, shallow-draft, high-block-coeffi- 
cient bulk carrier of Roseman (1987)provide two 
such series. Further refinements to the hull form, 
particu- larly the afterbody,  will require  additional 
model tests to verify performance.
  Traditionally, model tests of the refined hull form 
using the rotating arm or planar motiom mechanism 
(PMM)have been performed to develop 
coefficientsfor mathematical models such as those 
described in Sec- tion 8). Since model testing is 
expensive, only the fully appended model is usually 
tested. Definitive maneu- vers are then predicted, 
with the model used to deter- mine adequacy of the 
design through application of criteria, direct 
comparison with existing ships, use of the diagram of 
steering, and other techniques.  Full scale free 
running model tests  as described  in Section 7 are 
also used to a limited degree to demonstrate the 
adequacy of a design.
The fully appended tests and the perturbation model




 	 




such as that of Abkowitz (1964) work well as a final 
check of capabilities but do not practically assist with 
the alterations that may need to be made to improve 
capabilities of the hull form. The main reasons for this 
shortcoming are the cost and time required for testing. 
Changing the rudder to a more efficient form, for in- 
stance, would require a complete retesting l>incethe 
properties of a new rudder and the complex interaction 
effects with the hull are not separately identifiable in 
these models.
  Fediaevsky and Sobolov (1964), Asinovsky, et al 
(1987), the Japanese Mathematical Modeling Group 
(MMG)through Kose (1982), Dand (1987), Ankudinov 
(1987), Mikelis (1985), and others recommend using 
mathematical models that are more physically ori- 
ented. Authors of these  reports  attempt  to  separate 
the effects of hull, rudder(s), and propeller(s) in an 
approach much like that taken with the simplifiedequa- 
tions used in the prediction models described in Section
16.7. Some combination of series model tests and the- 
oretical coefficient prediction methods, along with 
proof-tested interaction relationships between hull, 
rudder, and propeller, will be necessary to make these 
models a practical reality for the ship designer. Their 
utility, however, will be tremendous, allowing easy, 
quick, and inexpensive tradeoffs among rudder, hull- 
form, and propeller alternatives in improving ship de- 
sign.
   16.9	Shiphandllng   Simulation.   Accident   studies 
such as Special Study (1981) have concluded that the 
primary cause of maneuvering accidents is operator 
error. The consideration of the human as part of the 
control loop of Fig. 1 (Section 2.1) is necessary if the 
vessel is to have adequate controllability for the op-


erational scenario and the conditions anticipated.
  Under most conditions, a pilot or shiphandler 
will deliberately use less of the controllability of 
a  ship than it inherently possesses. The 
shiphandler must al- low for his inability 
consistently to anticipate exact vessel response 
under changing conditions, and his inability 
always to make perfect judgments. He must also 
allow for time lags in machinery and other 
human controlled responses. Accordingly, a ship 
may be justly assumed to have less "piloted" 
controllability then "in- herent" controllability. 
The difference is called the "pil- oting margin" or 
margin of error, which is a prudent consideration 
in all forms of transportation used by man.
  Shiphandling simulators use a highly realistic 
thea- ter- or stage-like setting to allow the study 
of ship controllability with direct inclusion of 
human re- sponses and with allowances and 
reruns to accom- modate variations from man to 
man and from passage to passage. For realism the  
entire  bridge arrangement is usually duplicated 
as shown by example in Fig. 198. Often the "real 
world" outside the conning station is displayed 
by projection on a screen away from the bridge. 
Experienced pilots are normally chosen to han- 
dle the "vessel," and they may be provided with 
fa- miliar navigational aids such as conventional 
bridge instruments, a usable radar display, and a 
collision avoidance system. Leading lights (range  
marks), buoys, shorelines, and key visual cues, 
along  with other vessels, can also be portrayed 
visually on the screen.
  Historically, simulation has been associated 
with training instead of research as such. A 
familiar ex- ample is the aircraft cockpit 
simulator known as the


CONTROLLABILITY	359

Link  trainer,   which  has   seen  service  at least  since			The shiphandling simulator provides the ability to 
World  War  II.  First-generation   maritime  simulators		operate in real time and allows accurate  use of the 
were  in operation  by 1968 (Puglisi, 1987).		human being. The approach is limited only by the ac- 
In the early 1970's, it became apparent that research-	curacy of its mathematical models of ship and water- 
oriented  shiphandling  simulators   were  needed to in-		way (including current), and by the physical and visual 
vestigate   problems  associated  with marine transpor-		resemblance of the arrangement to reality. Real-time 
tation.   Such   simulators   would   have the  flexibility		operations, however, are time consuming and costly, 
necessary   to  investigate   various  aspects  of the real-		even though only parts  of anyone  voyage usually need
world  problems  that   concern  the   human  control  of	to be simulated, whether for research  or  training. 
ships.		Shiphandling   simulators    are   controlled   by com-
  In  the   broader   picture,   the  approach to  studying	puters employing mathematical models of varying 
problems  related   to  the  human  control  of vessels  in	complexity to predict ship trajectories. Effects of shal- 
restricted   waterways   is  largely  fragmented,  that  is,	low water, banks, currents, wind, waves, and even tugs 
naval  architects  address  vessel design; civil engineers,	are often included in the mathematical model. To allow 
channel  design;  the  U.S.  Coast  Guard,  aids to navi-	use of these effects, the data base must provide defi- 
gation;  psychologists,   the decision-making processes	nition of the waterway's  physical  and  environmental 
of the  mariner  on the  bridge;  etc. A  complete exami-	conditions in addition to a thorough mathematical de- 
nation  of  a marine  transportation   system requires  in-	scription of the behavior of the ship. McIlroy and Car- 
clusion  and  integration   of  all  relevant  factors in the	penter (1979) summarize the technical aspects of fast 
complex interactions  of  man,  ship, and environment.	time simulation at CAORF.
Some of  the  important factors  are:	While  the  computer   generated   visual  display has
  •	Channel geometry	become  the  most  popular  approach,  early simulators
  •	Vessel  hydrodynamics  and aerodynamics includ-	utilized a point light source  and  shadow  projection 
ing  shallow-water,  bank  and passing-ship effects	arrangement to effectively simulate night operations
•	Prevailing  current  and wind forces	(Hooft, 1975).There  is also a "model board" approach,
  •	Formal  aids to navigation,  such  as lights, ranges	in which a miniature camera probe moves over a model 
(leading  marks), and buoys	harbor as the ship is steered, and pictures of the sur-
  •	Informal  aids to navigation,  such as land features	roundings are projected on the screen. The use of sim- 
and buildings	ulators	to	deal	realistically	with	maneuvering
  •	Visibility,  ambient   lighting,   and other  environ-	problems has become fairly well accepted (Keith, 1977). 
ment effects	Table 35 lists representative shiphandling simulator
•	Human  operator  control  and decision processes	installations existing in 1986 (Puglisi, 1987).
•	Availability  of direct  assistance,  as by tugs	The shiphandling simulator is used for a wide variety


·	In conS'Id'ermg


th e  need  t0   m.


cIude  th ese  m.  terre Ia-


of purpo.s..es 
including design of 
the ship 
(bd'le"termibn'adtion


   h'	I'	I	h'	ht		to b   to  t  d	of reqUired mherent maneuvermg capa 1lties, n  ge 
Ions  IpS,~  oglCa app~oa~  mlg		seem.		e	s u .y	arrangement   and  equipment  layout,  and determining
t~e  operatmg   system  m  Its n~tural  envlronment-:-m	operational   procedures,   among   other  applications),
~ItU,so.to  speak,  Costs  and  nsks  make such studle~	training of the mariner, design of harbors and water- 
ImpractIcal to do properly. To help ensure that aCCI- ways,  the  placement  of navigational  aids, and others. 
dents  should  n~t  occur, the  custom~ry proce~ure has	Puglisi (1987)provides an overview of the history and 
been to overde~Ign the channel, th3;tIS,to provld~ more	predicted future development of marine simulators. 
channel  than. IS necessary   or  optImal  to permit  ade-		One of the most extensive research projects to use 
quate  saf~ty  m the  face  o! ul!kn?wn factors. Such an	the shiphandling  simulator  was a study  at the CAORF
~pproach ISno~c~st effectIve I~ VI~Wo.fmodern dredg-     simulator  on the widening of the  Panama  Canal (Pug- 
mg ,costs;.nor IS It cost effectIve m vIew ~f the para- lisi et aI., 1987). In addition to real-time simulations 
doxI~a~ cIrcumstance, now well establIshe~, that with experienced pilots on the full-scale bridge, many  
p~ovldmg greater searoom does ~ot necessarIly pro- off-line or "fast time analysis" runs were made to in- 
VIdegreater   safety  but  may proVI.deless ..	vestigate alternative layouts.
  A number o~ meth?ds of analYSISare ~vaI~able,but  Representation  of pilot control characteristics  is nec-  
each method ~Iffers !n t~e degree to WhIC~It can .ad- essary  on a fast-time  study  of trajectories.  Basically,  
dress the entI.re na~IgatlOnal p~ocess and m ~he tIme a rudder command is generated if the ship track shows
~nd co~t that  It en~lls.  HydraulIc models 3;sdIscussed	deviations in heading and distance  of the  ship  from  
m  SectIon 7:3 provld~.a  good representatIon  of ban.k	the  desired tra 'ecto	indicated as follows:
and bottom  rrregulantIes  and their effects on hydraulIc	J	ry,
forces. The approach, however, has high cost and time 
requirements, and does not usually address the navi- 
gation process or accurately model the vessel trajec- 
tories because of the small ship models involved and 
the time-scaling difficulties in using moving models.


c.,
0,
0



Table 35-Full Bridge  Simulators  (Puglisi, 1987)
(IMSF Correspondence, & Various MARSIM Conference Papers)
Operator	Location	Start	Manufacturer	Image	Ima!e 
Date		Generator	Disp ay
Source	Type
Japan  Radio Communications, Ltd.	Tokyo,Japan	1965	Japan  Radio Communications, Ltd.	4	3
Swedish State Sh building Experimental	Gothenberg, Sweden	06/67	SSPA	Unique	3
Tank Simulator (	PA)
TNO/IWECO  Institute of Mechanical	The Netherlands	04/68	TNO/IWECO, Delft, Holland	3	1
Engineering	TNO/IZF, Soesterberg, Holland
(Advisors)
Maritime Research Institute	The Netherlands	11/70	TNO/Delft, Holland	3	1
Netherlands, Wagengingen	TNO/IZF, Soesterberg, Holland






















"'0
;,o


(Advisors)	z
Hiroshima University	Hiroshima, Japan	06/71	Ship Motion Laboratory	Unique	1	0


Bremen Nautical Academy 
Simulator No. I



Bremen, W. Germany	03/75	Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm,


rm-
Cl)
Unique	2
	0


GMBH (MBB)	..,,
Simulator No. 2	Bremen, W. Germany	1978	Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm,	2	1	z
GMBH (MBB)	►
TNO Institute  for Perce tion	The Netherlands	06/75	TNO-IZF, Soesterberg, Holland	4	1
Soesterberg, The Nether ands	r-
Ishikawajima  Harima  Heavy	Tokyo,Japan	06/75	Ishikawajima  Harima  Heavy	Unique	1	►;,o
Industries Co., Ltd. (IHI)	Industries	n
University of Osaka	Osaka,Japan	09/75	Hitachi  Electric Co. ra;isual)	Unique	1	:::j
Furuno  Electric (Ra  ar)	n
-I
ComRuter  Aided Operations Research	New York, USA	01/76	Sperry Systems, USA	1	1	C:
Faci 1ty, U.S. Maritime Administration	m
Royal  Netherlands Naval College,	The Netherlands	10/76	Royal  Netherlands Naval College,	Unique	1
Den Heldor	Netherlands
Tokyo Univ. of Mercantile Marine	Tokyo,Japan	10/76	Tokyo Univ. of Mercantile Marine	Unique	1
Marine Safety International	New York, USA	11/76	Sperry Systems, USA	4	1
College of Maritime Studies




1es




Table 35-Full  Bridge  Simulators (Continued)
(IMSF Correspondence, & Various MARSIM Conference Papers)
Operator	Location	Start	Manufacturer	Image	Ima!e 
Date		Generator	Disp ay
Source	Type
Ship Maneuvering Simulator	Trondheim, Norway	01/80	Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm	2	1
06/83	Second Visual System	Unique	1
Ship Analytics, Inc.	Connecticut, USA	03/80	Ship Analytics, Inc., USA	1	2
Maritime  Institute of Technology and	Maryland, USA	1982	MBB/Singer Link	2	1
Graduate Studies (2 Bridges)
SUSAN Schiffsuhrungs-Simulator	Hamburg, W. Germany	03/83	Krupp Atlas Electronics	1	2
Hamburg	Bremen, W. Germany
CASSIM-Dept.  of Maritime Studies	Cardiff, U.K.	07/82	Racal/Decca/Marconi	1	2
Univ. of Wales Institute of Science
& Technology	n
CNHMF	0
Simulator No. 1	Leningrad, USSR	1983	Seagull, Norway	2	1	--4


Simulator No. 2	Leningrad, USSR	1985	Seagull, Norway	2	1
Maritime Training  and Research Center	Ohio, USA	09/83	Ship Analytics, Inc., USA	1	2


.0...
►0,
;=
=i


Quindao Maritime College	Quindao, China


1985	Seagull	2	1	-<


Finsim Technical  Research Center of	Helsinki, Finland	03/85	Racal/Decca/Marconi	1	2
Finland, Ship Laboratory
Australian Maritime College	Tasmania, Australia	04/85	Krupp  Atlas Electronics, W. Germany	1	2
Australian Navy	Tasmania, Australia	06/85	Krupp/ Atlas  Electronics, W. Germany	1	2
Maritime Technical College	Achiya, Japan	1986	Tokyo Keiko Co., Ltd	1	2
Japan Radio Co., Ltd.
National  Colle e of Marine	Kee Lung, Taiwan	1986	Krupp Atlas Electronics,  W. Germany	1	2
Science Techno ogy
United States  Coast Guard Academy	Connecticut, USA	03/86	Ship Analytics, Inc., USA	1	2
Harry  Lundber  s School of	Maryland, USA	04/86	Ship Analytics, Inc., USA	1	2
Seamanship (SI )
Kobe Mercantile Marine University	Kobe, Japan	1986	Furuno  Electric Co., Ltd.	2	1
West German Navy	Muewick, Germany	11/86	Krupp Atlas  Electronics, W. Germany	1	2
Note: This table includes all simulators known in 1986.



































(.)
0.


362	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



(Continued  from  page 359)
u-R = rudder command
1/J = ship heading angle
\/Jc= channel direction
lp' = distance between the ship and the desired 
trajectory relative to the ship length
a, b',c' = gain constants




0	0	0
0





1-.J
400m















0	-,-
'


r' = nondimensional rate of change of ship 
heading
Anticipatory control in negotiating turns in the water­



 	420m
/.:_: 		l-e35m-J I

 


way can be included. For this situation, rudder action	0
starts in advance of reaching the actual location of the	00
turn in the waterway.


  Criteria for acceptability under piloted control can 
include those addressed in Section 15. In the harbor 
and restricted waterway or channel situation, addi­ 
tional criteria may be applied in shiphandling simula­ 
tion studies. Panel H-10 (1975) proposed a series of 
controllability indices to give realistic measures of ca­ 
pability:
  •	Clearance distance of ship's swept path to channel 
bank and other obstacles along the path
  •	Preferred speed relative to upper and lower safe 
limits
•	Rudder deflections required and used en route
•	Wind and current effects
•	Margin of bottom clearance along path
  The Panel also proposed the concept of the "ABC" 
harbor wherein a test harbor or waterway situation 
could consist of a series of elemental maneuvers linked


Fig. 200 Sketch of maneuver used during "S-shaped" channel experiments.
Total length of maneuver is 4500 meters

♦
LIGHTNING IUOY

200,000-0WT TANKER
I
450,000-0WT TANKER







INITIAL HEAOIL ;·
351•	'
\
\
\
\
4,1-----......







a":'
"....' 
":1_'


500 -3a 
SWEPT 
PATH 
ENVELO
PE



2
:
r
-
-
-
-
-
-
,
-
t
-
-
,
-
-
-
,
-
-
-
1
'
I
I


....
"0'
"..J'	't.
:c
't
0""''







0500"'


I
'I
I
''
,''


'I
'
'\
\
\
500 m




WAVE
135•. 2m (HEIGHTI


a:
u




"a:' 
"....' 
":I'
....;



500

200


S
W
E
P
T
 
P
A
T
H
 
E
N
V
E
L
O
P
E
 
F
O
R
 
P
I
L
O
T
E
D
 
C
O
N
T
R
O
L
L
A
B
I
L
I
T
Y


3b. 
MINIMU
M BANK 
CLEARA
NCE 
ENVELO
PE


F
i
g
.
 
2
0
1
 
E
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
o
f
 
r
e
c
o
r
d
s
 
f
r
o
m
 
c
o
u
r
s
e
k
e
e
p
i
n
g
 
t
e
s
t
s


t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
.
 
T
h
e
 
e
l
e
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
m
a
n
e
u
v
e
r
s
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
b
e
 
d
r
a
w
n
 
f
r
o
m
 
d
i
f
f
i
c
u
l
t
 
o
r
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
a
t
i
v
e
 
p
a
s
s
a
g
e
s
 
f
r
o
m
 
a
 
n
u
m
­
 
b
e
r
 
o
f
 
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 
r
e
a
l
-
l
i
f
e
 
s
i
t
u
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
t
h
e
 
d
e
s
i
g
n
 
s
h
i
p
w
ou
ld 
be 
ex
pe
ct
ed  
to 
en
co
un
ter
.  
Fi
g. 
19
9 
sh
o
w
s 
an


!E 100
a:
"..J'
.."z.,
00










I	2	3	4	5	6	7	8
DISTANCE 
ALONG 
CHANNEL 
CENTERLIN
E, 
KILOMETE
RS


a
p
p
l
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
s
w
e
p
t
 
p
a
t
h
 
o
r
 
b
a
n
k
 
c
l
e
a
r
a
n
c
e
 
c
r
i
t
e
r
i
a
 
a
f
t
e
r
 
a
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
 
o
f
 
r
u
n
s
 
w
e
r
e
 
m
a
d
e
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
t
h
e
 
t
e
s
t
 
s
i
t
u
a
t
i
o
n
.
 
W
i
t
h
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
p
a
t
h
 
e
n
v
e
l
o
p
e
 
f
a
l
l
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
a
j
e
c
t
o
r
i
e
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t
r
i
a
l
 
r
u
n
s
,
 
a
n
d
 
a
n
 
i
d
e
a
 
o
f
 
h
o
w
 
w
e
l
l
 
t
h
e
 
v
e
s
s
e
l
­
 
h
u
m
a
n
 
s
y
s
t
e
m
 
c
a
n
 
p
e
r
f
o
r
m
 
i
s
 
d
e
r
i
v
a
b
l
e
 
f
r
o
m
 
t
h
e
 
p
l
o
t
.
 
R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
 
u
t
i
l
i
z
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
 
h
u
m
a
n
 
m
u
s
t
 
b
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
g
r
e
a
t


Fig. 199 Expected characteristics of swept path and bank clearance  during 
ABC port entry


care and with proper understanding if correct 
results are to be obtained. As an example, in an 
experiment


CONTROLLABILITY	363
.... .... ....


•	_ 10
•	0
la.
I-


.... ........



....




-0.._



........................




2
<(
C
<(
C
.C..
8
i







Fig. 202


6



'f

















-4.15	-4.10
STAIILITY  
INDEX 6e
Dynamic 
variations of spiral 
loop half-width 
with changes in 
hull
stability 
index

•
•
SEA 
DIST
URB
ANC
E II


.><..
0...
"IC'
§
)(

::I


!-




















Fig. 204


SEA 
DIS
TU
RB
AN
CE 
II	""0.,.
5


=-:i-------
---i:------I 
--  	-
0	0








0.010
	
0.015
	
0.0
	
0.025
AA/L•d
RUDDER AREA 
RATIO
Maximum course 
deviation and 
rudder angle vs. 
rudder area ratio


4	•
•
t:,.
A	A
2
0	•
&
O·
0	s	10	15
Fig. 203 Manual coursekeeping performance
for Exxon, investigators using the MARIN simulator 
at Wageningen (Panel H-10, 1975) attempted to deter­



ter guide for the pilot than did a very wide channel. 
Apparently, the narrowness helped him anticipate the 
needed maneuvers and kept him moderately stressed, (i.e., 
alert) so that he did a better job.
  Ohtagaki and Tanaka (1984) report use of the IHI Ship 
Maneuvering Simulator to determine the con­ trollability 
adequacy of a 450,000-dwt ULCC. Piloted operations of the 
design were compared with those of an existing 200,000-dwt 
vessel (see Fig. 201 for an example of test records). Results 
indicated  that  the new design would be controllable by the 
bang-bang rudder control with ease comparable to that of the 
existing smaller design.
  In another study, runs of a 20,000-dwt wide-beam, full-
form, small-LIB vessel were performed  to study the level of 
directional instability allowable. Fig. 202 shows the dynamic 
stability index,
N'	N'


mine the necessary width for an S-shaped channel to 
safely accommodate a 400,000-dwt vessel (see Fig.


t:,,.B=	Yr'  -  (!:,,.:+  !:,,./-)	, 


200). The intuitive belief is that the wider the channel, 
the better the seafarer will do. The narrowest channel 
simulated did result in the worst performance (largest 
excursions from channel centerline). It was found, 
however, that there is an optimal width. A marked 
hypothetical channel of moderate width provided a bet-


plotted against rudder area ratio. The vacant circles marked 
T1, T 2 , and T3 and the filled circles S1, S 2 , and S8 represent 
the combinations of C8 / (LI B ) and rudder area ratio 
adopted for the test ships. The manual coursekeeping 
simulations were performed at three
levels of sea disturbance:


 



Section 17
Design of Rudder and Other Control Devices
"The  rudder  serves   the   twofold   function 
of  stabilizing  a  straight  motion  by   fin 
effect and controlling  the  ship  in  steering 
and  maneuvering,"	(Norrbin, 1960)
  17.1	Rudd.r    and    Control   D.vice	D.sign	Proc- and thruster sizes and placement can then be defined.
•••. The rudder, other control surfaces, and control All of these  items affect the  controllability of the  ship 
devices such as bow thrusters are critically important and are coupled as noted in earlier sections. Therefore 
features in achieving vessel controllability goals. AI- the type of stern, the shafting  supports,  the  type  of  
though other control devices can assist in achieving rudder, its hydrodynamic efficiency,its structural su~ 
controllability, the rudder is nearly always the most ports, and clearances between propeller and rudder 
prominent. Accordingly, the rudder receives the great- should be evaluated.
est  attention  in this  section, which outlines the design			Toward the end of the preliminary design stage, the 
process.		rudderstock	location  should  be  examined  to   see 
At the  concept design stage,  the naval  architect has	whether   structural	supports can be provided and little 
on which to base decisions. In sketching the vessel		whether steering gear can be arranged as normal in 
profile, what  may  temporarily  suffice is to allow room		past practice. If not, special  arrangements should be 
for what  merely  looks right:  a reasonably shaped rud-		considered. (For example, the steering gear rams may 
der  of the  size and  type  commonly seen  for  ships of		be located a deck below the pumps and motors that
the  anticipated  class  and  service. Thrusters should be	drive them.)	.
sketched   in  if  they  are  commonly  used. If  possible,			The contract design stage generally includes an 
mission requirements   should be defined by this stage,		early review of the previous design work. This review 
and  tradeoffs  brought under consideration.		is to check whether typical "last-minute refinements," 
During  the  preliminary  design  development of the	particularly of the hull form, require  changes in the hull 
form, decisions must  be made regarding the shape		rudder shape, efficiency, or  location. These  changes 
of the  underbody,  distribution  of buoyancy, shapes of		are made along with the usual effects of continuing 
sections, and the underwater  profile. Propeller, rudder,		design developments (for example, changes in the pro-


CONTROLLABILITY	365



peller location). The results of tests ordered earlier are 
also used, and there may still be time to order addi- 
tional maneuvering design studies.
  The designer is limited in design of the rudder and 
other control surfaces by four major constraints:
  (a)	In profile, the rudder should fit within the di- 
mensions dictated by the shape of the hull. Its maxi- 
mum span should fit within the vertical distance 
measured from the bottom of the deepest projection 
below the baseline of the ship permitted by draft or 
docking restrictions upward to the bottom of the hull 
immediately over the rudder or to the minimum pre- 
scribed depth below the water surface (see Section 
17.2), whichever is lower. If the rudder is abaft the 
propeller, its chord should fit within the horizontal 
distance from the extremity of the ship to a line cor- 
responding to a prescribed clearance from the propel- 
ler. (Control surfaces that extend significantly beyond 
the block dimensions of a ship, such as fin stabilizers, 
or the bow planes on some submarines, are almost 
always designed to be retractable.)
  (b)	The rudders, in maintaining a straight course, 
should minimumize speed loss at every level of ship 
powerplant output.
  (c)	The rudder, the rudder stock, the rudder sup- 
port, and the steering engine, considered together, 
should be of minimum size, weight, complexity, and 
initial cost, consistent with needed effectiveness and 
accepted standards of reliability and low upkeep costs.
  (d)	Undesirable effects of the rudder on the ship 
such as rudder-induced vibration should be kept to a 
tolerable level.
  Speed loss and angle of heel during limit maneuvers 
are excluded from the last constraint since for con- 
ventional ships fitted with the usual appendages  both 
of these items are mainly functions of the severity of 
the maneuver. They should be considered when the 
limiting design maneuvers are selected. Speed loss dur- 
ing maneuvers is a function of the type of propulsion 
plant and of the ship configuration; it is not a direct 
function of the rudder design. Angle of heel during 
maneuvers is a function of hull configuration and the 
mass distribution of the hull, and only secondarily of 
rudder design.
  Violation of any of the four listed constraints con- 
stitutes a misjudgment in rudder design.  Because  of 
the influence of the rudder on ship power  [constraint 
(b)] adherence to a minimum total ship cost [constraint 
(c)] requires consideration of the entire ship design 
process.
  From a hydrodynamic point of view, the basic con- 
siderations of rudder design are summarized as fol- 
lows:
  (a)	Type of Rudder: All-movable rudders are de- 
sirable for their ability to produce large turning forces 
for their size (Section 12). The following ranges of 
numerical values can be used  as  a rough  first  guide  
in selecting a balance ratio according to block coeffi-



cient (by "balance ratio" is meant the rudder area 
forward of the rudder stock divided by the total rudder 
area):


Structural considerations, cost, the need for additional 
stabilizing side forces provided by a horn, and the 
considerations may require use of other types of rud- 
ders such as the semisuspended (or horn) rudder. The 
horn type is also favored for operations in ice.
  (b)	Location:	Every effort should be made to 
place the rudder abaft of the propeller at the stern. 
Combinations such as twin rudders with single  screw 
or single rudder with twin screws  should be avoided. 
At zero or low ship speed, the propeller ship stream 
increases rudder effectiveness to a great extent. The 
stern rudder is far more effective than the bow rudder 
for maneuvering ahead. The main reason for this dif- 
ference in effectiveness is the direction of drift angle, 
which makes a substantial contribution to the  turning 
of the ship when the rudder is  located  at  the  stern. 
The contribution of drift angle is in the opposite di- 
rection if the bow rudder is used, reducing ahead ma- 
neuvering performance. For astern maneuvering, the 
bow rudder becomes the more effective, for the same 
reason.
  (c)	Area: A suitable rudder area for a given hull 
form can be selected to satisfy desired degrees of 
dynamic stability and maneuvering performance in 
calm water. Since full-form ships are generally less 
stable, relatively more rudder area for these ships is 
helpful for meeting stability requirements. The final 
determination of rudder area should reflect  the  fact 
that relatively large rudders provide superior perform- 
ance under adverse conditions of wind and wave.
  (d)	Height: Although rudder height is generally 
limited by the stern shape and draft, rudder height 
should be increased as much as possible, to obtain the 
more efficient higher aspect ratio. The bottom of the 
rudder is kept above the bottom of the keel for pro- 
tection, with high clearances in cases where there is 
frequent operation with trim by the stern.
  (e)	Section   Shape:	Relatively thick streamlined 
sections (e.g., NACA 0018 and 0021) are desirable, 
because these sections have a relatively constant cen- 
ter of pressure.  Thick sections  are  also superior  from 
a structural point of view, and they offer reasonable 
drag characteristics.
if)   Rate of Swing:	In addition to the size and hy-
drodynamic efficiency of the rudder design,  the  rate 
of swing should be considered. The effect of an 
increase over the 2Ys deg/sec standard rate is greatest 
on fast and responsive vessels.


366	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

STEERING  FORCE   AT STERN
EFFECTS OF SIDE FORCE ANO YAW MOMENT ADDITIVE

I
I	I
j' 	I
SIDE-FORCE	YAW-MOMENT	RESULTANT 
EFFECT		EFFECT		EFFECT


STEERING  FORCE AT BOW
EFFECTS OF SIDE FORCE AND YAW MOMENT SUBTRACTIVE

I
I
'
f	SID	YA
EFFECT	EFFECT	EFFECT




SIDE  FORCE

YAW MOMENT

VELOCITY   COMPONENT

RESULTANT  VELOCITY

0111'1 ANGLE  C ANGLE  Of'  ATTACK I

Fig. 205 Effect of location of steering force (Crane, 1973)



  Large full-form ships benefit more from having 
large-area rudders than from an increase in rate of 
swing.
The following sections address these basic items in


equations of ship motion for dynamically stable ships 
(Section 6.4) is:
Tu   .	L	[  Yv'Na-'	Nv'Ys'	]


more detail and review other control devices that can 
be used to improve the controllability of the basic ves­ 
sel.
  17.2	Rudder Types and Location. The type of rud­ 
der and its location and placement relative to the pro­ 
peller have significant influence on  rudder 
effectiveness and ship controllability. Rudders should 
be located near the stern and should be located in the 
propeller stream for good controllability.
  Both experience and theory show that for a dynam­ 
ically stable forward-moving ship at all speeds except 
dead slow, lateral control forces should be exerted at 
the stern and not at the bow. This assertion can be 
demonstrated as follows:
  The formula for a ship's dimensionless turning rate 
(ignoring nonlinear effects) as derived from the linear


rmng rate=	R=	6R  Yv'Nr' -  Nv'(Yr' - a')	(26b)
where Lis ship length, R is turning radius, and 
6R is rudder angle. Although Equation 26b 
relates properly only to dynamically stable 
ships, it illustrates the point for any vessel.
  With conventional rudder location at the 
stern, the dimensionless turning rate is 
proportional  to  the sum of the magnitudes of 
the two numerator terms (as a result of canceling 
signs, etc.). But if the rudder is located at the 
bow, the sign of the factor N 8 is re­ versed, and 
turning rate is then proportional to the difference 
in the magnitudes of the two terms.
  Physically this relationship is explained as  
follows: A lateral control force at the stern 
produces two ac­ tions-rotation of the hull in 
one direction and trans-


CONTROLLABILITY	367



lation to the opposite side (Fig. 205). When combined 
with forward ship motion these actions generate drift 
angle in the same direction, and drift angle brings into 
play the large hydrodynamic side force and consequent 
yaw moment that actually causes the turning. If, in- 
stead, the lateral control force acts at the bow, the 
contributions to drift angle due to yaw rotation and 
lateral translation are  in opposite directions  and  tend 
to cancel each other. Because both contributions are 
large, their difference is small, and turning  rate  is 
much smaller than in the rudder-aft case.
  Locating rudders at the stern in the propeller race 
takes advantage of the added velocity of the race  both 
at normal ahead speeds and at zero ship speed. This 
advantage is significant and may not require any in- 
crease in propulsion power over what would be re- 
quired if the rudder were not in the  race.  The reason 
for this fortunate circumstance is that  a  properly 
shaped rudder in the race can recover some of the 
rotating energy of the race which would otherwise be 
lost. There are, however, some negative aspects as- 
sociated with locating a rudder in the propeller race. 
One is the possibility of rudder-induced ship vibration. 
For this reason, clearances of one propeller radius or 
more are common between the propellers and rudders 
of high-powered ships. Weinig (1947)further cautions 
against locating a rudder directly behind the centerline 
of the propeller shaft on high-speed ships, because at 
high speeds the propeller hub sheds a vortex or cav- 
itation cone which tends to erode a rudder located 
directly abaft the hub. Because of this effect, twin 
rudders of high-speed ships  are  sometimes  displaced  
a short distance athwartships from  the  centerline  of 
the propeller shaft, but are nevertheless still substan- 
tially in the propeller race. Locating twin rudders  off 
the shaft centerline may also be desirable to permit 
shaft withdrawal during repair or overhaul of the ship.
  Some kinds of ships with specialized functions have 
bow control surfaces as well as stern control surfaces. 
For example, double-ended ferry boats, which do not 
turn around at their terminals, have a bow rudder as 
well as a stern rudder  so that  no matter  which way  
the ferry goes, it has a rudder at its "stern."
  Submarines have horizontal bow planes and stern 
planes to control their motion in the vertical  plane. 
Bow planes are moderately effective in this case be- 
cause they either extend beyond the hull lines or are 
located on a superstructure above the main hull and 
hence do not interact too unfavorably with the hull. 
Bow planes extending beyond the hull lines are usually 
made retractable. The primary  function of bow planes 
is to improve control at low speed at periscope depth 
under a rough sea. In the case of submarines that are 
very unsymmetrical about the xy-plane,  bow  planes 
are also useful to control depth at very low speeds 
deeply submerged; in this case the stern planes can 
cause ambiguous effects for reasons associated  with 
the existence of the hydrostatic moment,  



topic is more fully discussed by Arentzen and Mandel (1960).
  If possible, surface-ship rudders should be located  so that 
the hull of the ship at the waterline covers the top of the 
rudder throughout its arc of swing. Keeping the rudder 
covered acts to prevent aeration even if the depth of 
submergence of the top of the rudder is small. On some 
ships this covering is easily achieved.
  The trend towards wide stern and transom-stern merchant 
ships, initiated primarily to increase propel- ler-hull 
clearance as ship speed increases (Hadler and Cheng, 1965), 
facilitates permitting the hull to com- pletely cover the 
rudder.
  On some merchant ships, the top of the  rudder should be 
kept as far below the water surface as pos- sible. Shiba 
(1960)indicates that the depth of submer- gence (I) to the 
midspan of the rudder  should be not less than about 0.9 of 
the span (b) to avoid the dele- terious effects of the free 
surface on rudder lift. If the submergence ratio is less than 
0.9, the effect on the rudder normal force coefficient is 
reduced as was shown in Fig. 127 (See also Section 14.3).
  Usually the shape of a ship's hull is developed with- out 
particular regard to the rudder. In that event the rudder 
location should conform to the shape of  the hull.
  With few exceptions, the axes of ships' rudders are 
vertical and the axes of submarines' bow and stern planes 
are horizontal. Exceptions are the canted rud- ders used on a 
few large tankers and the "X-stern"  used on certain 
submarines with the four control sur- face axes located at 45 
deg to the horizontal and ver- tical.
  Fig. 206 shows the major rudder types available to the 
designer. The performance characteristics of some have 
been discussed in Section 14. The following four rudder 
types will be examined in the light of the four constraints of 
Section 17.1:
  (a)	All-movable rudder [c, g, h of Fig. 206, see also 
Figs. 54, 121, 142(a), 207, and 149]
(b)	Horn rudder [e and f, see also Figs. 143(b)and
208]
  (c)	Balanced rudder with fixed structure [d, see also Fig. 
143(a)]
  (d)	All-movable rudder with tail flap [see Fig.
142(d)]
  Each of these types has been used as a single or multiple 
rudder on single and multiple-screw ships. As noted in 
Section 14 the fourth type is most commonly used as 
stabilizer fins on ships and only rarely as a rudder, even 
though any specified level of course- changing ability (but 
not controls-fixed stability)  can be achieved with less 
rudder area with this than with any of the other types. The 
main disadvantages of this type of rudder are the complexity 
and cost of its con- struction and maintenance, and its being 
less effective astern than the simpler, all-movable rudder.
With the possible exception of the large, fast ships


 




discussed in the next paragraph, the all-movable rud- 
der is preferable for ships that possess controls-fixed 
stability without a rudder. For ships that are unstable 
without a rudder, the rudder area needed to achieve 
controls-fixed stability may be larger than that nec- 
essary to provide the specified course-changing ability. 
If so, the horn rudder or balanced-with-fixed-structure 
rudder may be an attractice alternative to the all-mov- 
able rudder because the total (fixedplus movable) area 
of either of these rudders can be adjusted  to  provide 
the necessary controls-fixed stability while the mova- 
ble area can be adjusted independently to provide the 
required limit-maneuver characteristic. Minimum total 
area generally satisfies the second but not necessarily 
the third constraint of Section 17.1, while minimum 
movable area should satisfy the third constraint.
  The principal disadvantage of an all-movable rudder 
is that unless structural support is provided to the 
bottom of the rudder (see Figs. 54 and 207)the rudder 
stock must withstand  a  substantial  bending  moment 
as well as the torque moment. The bottom-supported 
type of rudder was common on slow- and medium- 
speed single-screw merchant ships, but its use is 
avoided on high-speed ships because the cantilevered 
support is a potential source of vibration. Also, its 
contribution to the support of the rudder may be struc- 
turally complicated.
  While the required rudder stock size is not excessive 
for most ships, it tends to become excessive on large,



fast ships. On these ships, a reduction in required rud- 
der stock size can be achieved by extending the lower 
support bearing down into the rudder as far as prac- 
tical, or by using either the horn rudder or the balanced 
rudder with fixed structure. With these rudders, the 
bending moment on the stock is substantially reduced 
because bearing support is provided close to the span- 
wise location of the center of pressure of the rudder.
   17.3	Number of Rudders. The use of more than one 
rudder can increase controllability. Consider twin rud- 
ders athwartship of each other in the free stream. The 
total lift and drag produced should be identical to that 
of a singie rudder, provided that each of the twin 
rudders is geometrically similar to the single  rudder 
and that the area of the single rudder  is twice the area 
of one of the twin rudders. As the  spacing  between  
the twin rudders is reduced, they become less effective 
because of the interference (cascade) effect between 
them. In practice, however, two rudders can usually 
have a much higher aspect ratio than that of a single 
rudder of equal total area. Hence, at  any  given angle 
of attack below the stall angle, twin rudders  may have 
a higher total lift coefficient and therefore larger val- 
ues of 1"8 and N' 8 than a single rudder in spite of the 
interference effect. Furthermore, on multiple-screw 
ships, twin rudders can each be located in a propeller 
race, whereas a single centerline rudder ordinarily can- 
not.
Another, subtle difference between twin and single


CONTROLLABILITY	369



 

rudders has more important influence than the pre- 
ceding on both course-keeping and course-changing 
ability. Figs. 47(a) and 47(b) show that for a single 
rudder in the  free  stream,  Y'8  and  N 3  are  equivalent 
to (Y'/l)jand(N'/l)jthe	situation of a fixed fin at an angle 
of attack. Comparison of Fig. 209(a) with Fig. 209(b) 
shows that this is not true for  twin  rudders  even  if 
only free-stream effects are considered. Because of the 
location of the twin rudders relative to the flow in Fig. 
209(b) the interference effects between them is larger 
than it  is  in Fig.  209(a). To keep interference  effects 
to a minimum, the location relative to the flow shown 
on Fig. 209(e)would be best. (This is the conventional 
location of the two wings of a biplane.) Since in Fig. 
209(b) the two rudders are in just the opposite posi- 
tions, the lift developed by the flow conditions corre- 
sponding to that figure is less than that of Fig. 209(a).
  When the straightening effect of the hull and pro- 
peller, E, (see Fig.  209(b) on the  flow to  twin rudders 
is considered, the lift developed by the flow conditions 
of Fig. 209(b)is even less than in the free  stream.  Fig. 
3 of Surber (1955) shows that the value of E at the 
athwartship location of the rudder on the inside of a 
turn is larger than at the location of the outside rudder 
over the lower half of the rudder span. This inequality 
arises because the flow to the inside rudder is some- 
what straightened by the intervening  propeller  and 
hull, whereas at least the lower half of the outside 
rudder is subjected to the full geometric  drift  angle.  
As a result of this effect, and the effect described  in  
the previous paragraph, the (Y' /l )j and (N /l)j values of



the rudder on the inside of the turn are substantially 
less than its Y'8 and N 8 values.
  As a result of this distinction between twin and sin- 
gle rudders, the effect of increasing rudder area or 
rudder aspect ratio on the stability index and on the 
steady turning diameter is also different. Results of 
linear computations are shown in Fig. 210 for the 
twin- screw model of Gertler and Bradley (1948). For 
sim- plicity, the effect of rudder area in the race was 
neg- lected.
  The experimental data of Shiba (1960) and Gertler 
and Bradley (1948)indicate that the relative improve- 
ment in steady turning diameter attributable to twin 
rudders compared to a single rudder  shown Fig.  210 
for a rudder deflection angle of 15 deg  also exists  at 
the maximum deflection angle of 35 deg. Hence, the 
trends observed in Fig. 210 are true for severe limit 
maneuvers. It follows that twin  rudders  are  likely to 
be preferable to a single rudder for  ships  that  have 
very stringent limit-maneuver requirements. For ex- 
ample, the fourth and fifth scales show that twin rud- 
ders with a total area of 2.5 percent of L X T  and  a 
span of 17.3 percent of (L  X  T)1/2  have a STD/L value 
26 percent less than that of a single rudder of identical 
area and span. Furthermore, Fig. 210 shows that this 
reduction is achieved with no sacrifice in stability in- 
dex. Conversely, if the turning  diameter  associated 
with a single rudder is adequate, the figure shows that 
the same tunring diameter might be achieved with far 
less total rudder area with twin rudders. However, in




370	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



Oil ---u
OUTSIDE !-	---
--1-----IICii:====: ========+x-

 
  

Fig. 211 shows an unusual triple-rudder 
arrange­ ment, that achieves most of the 
maneuvering advan­ tages of twin rudders but 
at less cost. While the horizontal struts needed 
to support the wing blades add to the drag of 
this installation, only a single steer­ ing engine 
is required, and by properly choosing the fore-
and-aft location of the wing blades the torque 
required to deflect the rudder can be kept to 
modest


(o)  TWIN  RUDDERS; 4,,= o1 ,6R+€=O	/





levels. This arrangement has 
been used on a  twin screw 
ship built with a single 
centerline rudder.
  17.4	Rudder Size. The 
rudder area should be cal­ 
culated and verified during the 
initial ship arrangement study. 
A good first step is to use the 
Det norske Veritas


kNJ6	\  %,	_!"·t· ,


(DnV) value for minimum rudder 
area (Rules, 1975):


/\,-----Eu
OUTSIDE ,._  	 
RUDDER




where


AR = T x LBP [


2
( B	)
LBP


(156)


(b)	TWIN RUDDERS;C,,.=O R + = o
1

 
 	
---	u ---	- ---	-
 	


AR = area of rudder
T= draft
LBP = length between 
perpendiculars
B = beam
The formula applies only to 
rudder arrangements in


 		which the rudder is located directly behind the pro­



(c)	WING POSITIONS OF TYPICAL BIPLANE
Fig. 209 Single and twin lifting surfaces relative ta flaw velocity
(side view)



this case, the twin-rudder ship would exhibit a marked 
reduction in controls-fixed stability compared to the 
single-rudder ship.
  For most ships, constraints (b) and (c) of Section 17.1 
dictate the selection of a single rudder. An exception 
is the case where the specified course-changing ability 
cannot be achieved with a rudder that fits within the 
dimensional constraint (a). However, no single-screw 
merchant ship is in this category, nor are most mul­ 
tiple-screw merchant ships. Thus some multiple-screw 
ships do have single centerline rudders, but with the 
consequent penalty in turning characteristics shown 
in Fig. 210, along with the significant penalty in low­ 
speed maneuvering ability associated with not having 
a rudder in the propeller race.
  Vessels of low to moderate draft often require mul­ 
tiple rudders to provide adequate maneuverability, 
since a reasonable aspect ratio cannot be obtained with 
only one rudder. For example, multiple rudders are 
utilized on river towboats that must maneuver a large 
flotilla of barges, many times their own size, in a nar­ 
row river channel. Some of these rudders, forward of 
the propellers, are called "flanking" rudders. Also, be­ 
cause of the first constraint of Section 17.1 and because 
of the requirements for outstanding maneuvering per­ 
formance, the majority of naval combatant ships have 
two or more rudders.


peller. For any other rudder arrangement, DnV re­ 
quires an increase in the rudder area of at least 30 
percent. A twin-screw (or more) arrangement 
should be combined with rudders located directly 
behind the propellers for maximum low-speed 
maneuverability. A single rudder placed between 
two propellers may be inadequate because the 
rudder blade does not swing sufficiently into the 
flow of a propeller to generate the needed turning 
moment.
  The bracketed quantity in the preceding formula is 
essentially a rudder area coefficient. The value of this 
quantity should be compared with an independent es­ 
timate made by:
  (a)	Selecting a tentative value from design expe­ 
rience such as in Tables 31 and 36 or similar tables 
prepared by Lamb and Cook (1961) or others. Fig. 
212 may also be used which shows a plot of rudder 
areas against the underwater profile areas for vessels 
in the USCG maneuvering data base (Barr, Miller, 
Ankudi­ nov and Lee, 1981). The mean lines indicate 
average rudder area by vessel type and underwater 
profile. Rudder areas lying much below the mean line 
should be avoided.
  (b)	Modifying the tentative value in light of pub­ 
lished sources and other historical experience.
  Many potential maneuvering troubles can be 
avoided early in the design stage by providing a  
margin  of extra rudder area. For some  vessel  types,  
however, the benefits may diminish after the rudder 
profile has reached 2 percent of the lateral underwater 
area. The designer must realize that the effectiveness 
of extra rudder areas is directly dependent on the 
inherent dy­ namic course stability of the vessel class. 
Vessels with


 	 


marked stability will benefit least, while vessels with 
instability will benefit most.
  These values should be compared and the selected 
rudder area drawn to scale on the stern outline, using 
the lines, propeller, and rudderstock location.
  Table 29(b) and Fig. 180 in Section 16, along with 
Fig. 212, show the effects of rudder size in relationship 
to turning diameter and rudder area for models that 
have different block coefficients. Table 29(b) lists re- 
sults from Shiba (1960) which were obtained in free- 
running model tests of models 2.5 m long (LIB = 7.30, 
BIT = 2.5). As shown in the  test  results,  the  effects 
of speed on turning  diameters are very small in a speed
range   corresponding   to  Froude  numbers  as  high as
0.25. Fig. 212 shows that the best turning performance 
for the Series 60 design is obtained when rudder  area 
is roughly 1/50 to 1/40 the product of length  times  
draft (LT). Since the standard size of the  rudder  for 
the  Series  models is 1/62  of LT, the  maneuvering per-


372	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 
Fig. 211 Triple-bladed rudder on a twin-screw ship (Fig. 10 of Gertler and 
Bradley, 1948)


formance can be further improved by increasing rud­ 
der area up to 1/50 to 1/40 of LT. As discussed in 
Section 14.4, however, rudder effectiveness may not 
increase significantly if only rudder chord is increased, 
for rudder effectiveness depends more heavily on rud­ 
der span length than on chord length. The data in 
Table 29(b) show this anomalous saturation effect as 
rudder area is increased. Shiba (1960) associates this 
anomaly entirely with the decrease in rudder aspect 
ratio as rudder area is  increased,  but  decreasing  
aspect  ratio is not a necessary condition for the 
existence of the anomaly and in principle it can be 
encountered even when rudders of  constant  aspect  
ratio  are  increased in area. Table 37 provides further 
examples of geo­ metry on several existing ships. 
Rudder size versus effectiveness was studied relative 
to the importance of rudder deflection rate and is 
discussed in Section 17.6. Depending on hull form and 
powering, a larger rudder with slower deflection rate 
may be as effective as a smaller rudder with faster rate.
  Previous analyses of directional stability and 
control under adverse conditions in wind and waves 
indicate that performance with a relatively larger 
rudder is superior. Such a rudder may also be 
effective in ex­ treme maneuvers such as those 
required to avoid a collision in an emergency. 
These important factors












.N.......
-
i
I




100










 
AREA  of  UNDERIATEII  PIIOFILE  (LKTJ  lleu  r, 2
Fig. 212 Rudder area versus underwater profile area (USCG data base) 
(Landsburg, et  al 1983)


 	 





should be reflected in the final determination of rudder 
size in conjunction with constraint (c) of Section 17.1, 
which urges economy.
  One approach to determining the needed rudder area 
and aspect ratio is to start with a value of the stability 
index thought necessary and use linear methods to 
determine areas and aspect ratios that will meet the 
requirement (See Section 16.6).Also, if the most severe 
limit-maneuver characteristic is required, such as the 
rate of change of heading or the steady turning diam- 
ter, a similar approach can be taken in meeting those 
requirements. For a more limited group of hull forms, 
available series model test data can be used such as 
those reported by Eda and Crane (1965),Taylor's Stan- 
dard Series (using Jacobs, 1962),and Roseman (1987). 
The all-movable rudder area needed in association with 
a fixed span to achieve specified nonlinear limit-ma- 
neuver	characteristics	for single-screw merchant 
forms may also be approximated from the experimen- 
tal data of Figs. 180 and 213. Empirical guidance for 
selecting the rudder area of single-screw  merchant 
ships to provide controls-fixed dynamic stability and 
specified turning characteristics is given in Figs.  1 and 
2 of Thieme (1965).
The vital effect of changes in hull form on the rudder



area needed to achieve a specified turning diameter is 
shown in Fig. 213. For example, this figure indicates 
that 40 percent more rudder area is required to achieve 
a turning diameter of three ship  lengths  at  8R  = 45 
deg with the (GB = 0.60) model than with the (GB = 
0.80) model. If a turning diameter of two ship lengths 
were required, it could not be achieved on the (GB = 
0.60) model with a single rudder, regardless of area. 
Increase in rudder effectiveness through using an im- 
proved section or adding fins or mounting twin 
rudders may be required.
  For most single-rudder ships, the limit on rudder 
span imposed by the first constraint of Section 17.1 is 
much more severe than the restriction on rudder chord. 
As a result, the rudder span permitted by the first 
constraint is usually chosen. For any given rudder area 
this span determines the aspect ratio. Increasing the 
rudder chord, particularly the part in  the  propeller 
race, may solve the problem. As area is increased, the 
aspect ratio is decreased. Only on some twin-rudder 
ships is there any real freedom to  alter  rudder  area 
and rudder aspect ratio independently of each other.
  Where this freedom does exist, the designer must 
note that the rudder area that is in the propeller race 
may change with aspect ratio. If the restriction on


374	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 37-Parameters of Hull and Appendage Geometry of Several Existing Ships (Mandel, 1953)
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11	12
8Cut-


1Aver-	away
Tactical	acfce	area/


Le f1


Movable rudder


diam/L,		No. of		No.			ruder    2Propeller   L  X  T,			cut-			area/ 
at low				rud-			of	Length/  Length/  overlap,		outside		per-		away		L X T, 
V/$,	rudder		ders	screws		beam	draft	percent	of Hull	cent	L, percent	Skegs	percent
2.4	All movable	2	2	6.2	26.1	54.4	Low	7.3	8.1	Single	3.2
2.5	All movable	2	2	5.5	20.9	83.3	Low	6.5	10.8	Single	2.3
2.6	All movable	2	2	6.7	29.9	67.9	Low	7.8	17.5	Single	2.6
2.7	Horn	1	4	8.8	29.7	11.1	Low	7.5	13.1	Sinile	1.9
2.8	Horn	2	4	6.6	21.9	72.3	Low	5.5	8.0	Twin mb'd	2.6
2.8	Horn	2	4	8.0	24.1	62.1	Low	6.6	9.0	Twin inb'd	2.3
2.9	Horn	1	4	9.5	29.2	24.2	Low	7.1	12.6	Single	1.9
3.0	Horn	1	4	9.1	25.0	13.7	Low	7.1	15.7	Single	1.9
3.0	Horn	1	4	9.2	28.3	15.4	Low	6.9	14.9	Single	2.0
3.0	Horn	1	2	7.1	22.6	0	Low	4.6	7.6	Single	2.2
3.0	Horn	2	4	6.2	19.6	72.2	Low	8.2	9.9	Twin outb'd	2.4
3.0	Horn	1	4	10.1	26.6	20.0	Low	7.4	15.3	Single	2.1
3.1	All movable	2	2	4.9	15.6	58.4	Medium	9.2	13.6	Single	3.6
3.2	Horn	1	4	8.4	25.8	13.7	Low	7.4	15.7	Single	2.0
3.2	Horn	1	4	9.4	27.4	10.1	Low	8.2	15.4	Single	2.0
3.3	Horn	1	4	8.7	27.8	6.5	Low	6.8	14.2	Sinile	1.9
3.3	Horn	2	4	8.0	27.7	58.3	Low	7.1	8.5	Twin mb'd	2.4
3.4	Horn	1	4	9.3	28.4	6.5	Low	7.0	14.2	Single	1.9
3.4	Horn	2	4	6.7	25.1	50.0	Low	5.7	10.8	Single	1.5
3.4	Horn	1	4	8.8	25.6	13.9	Low	6.7	10.6	Single	2.0
3.5	Horn	1	2	10.0	25.9	26.8	Medium	7.6	13.9	Single	1.9
3.5	All movable	2	2	9.5	31.8	62.3	Hi  h	9.6	16.0	Single	3.1
3.6	All movable	2	2	8.2	25.2	58.8	Mefum	6.9	14.9	Single	2.0
3.7	All movable	1	2	9.1	30.2	4.4	Medium	7.2	17.3	Single	2.1
3.7	All movable	1	2	9.3	31.7	5.0	Medium	7.5	17.0	Single	2.1
3.8	All movable	2	2	9.2	29.7	64.9	High	7.7	16.0	Single	3.3
4.0	Horn	2	2	9.0	27.9	77.7	High	8.5	15.1	Single	2.4
4.2	Horn	1	2	9.4	27.9	5.2	High	8.0	15.1	Single	3.0
4.3	All movable	1	2	10.2	29.0	28.0	High	10.3	16.7	Single	3.0
4.3	Horn	2	2	9.4	28.i	73.8	High	8.4	14.5	Single	2.3
4.7	Flap	1	2	7.2	17.5	19.2	Low	2.7	3.2	Single	1.9
4.9	All movable	1	2	9.5	26.7	6.8	High	7.6	13.7	Single	2.0
5.1	Horn	1	2	9.4	29.3	5.2	High	8.8	15.1	Single	2.2
5.2	Horn	1	4	8.3	27.8	7.7	Low	2.4	5.0	Single	2.4
,ttltOHLLElt
.,,


I
M SteTION


@
CUTAWAY AIIEA








I	AICOA


(D ltUDDElt OY!ltLAtt •
1eo1 ll 100
ueon,


(i)	,11ottELLEt1	,  .!!W
OUTSIDE	lfUU. AICDA


LENGTH    o,	eUTAWA'I'	•	A I






rudder span is imposed by proximity to the free sea 
surface, then a study of the relative advantages of 
conserving aspect ratio and increasing submergence 
may be desirable. These can be evaluated for all-mov­ 
able rudders within the range of geometric aspect ra-


tios of 1.1 to 1.7 by reference to Figs. 26.1, 26.2, and
26.3	of Shiba (1960) from which Fig. 127 
was con­ structed.
  If, within the limits of a fixed span, the rudder 
area necessary to achieve controls-fixed stability is 
larger


CONTROLLABILITY	375




45


40


35


aZ 30
ii:
O   25


e  20
Ii::
ii: 15
Q

10





f







EXPERIMENTAL 
DATA FROM
+ Shiba (1960)
o Eskigian 
(1956)



  17.5	M
axi
mu
m 
Ru
dde
r 
Def
ledi
on 
An
gle 
At 
lea
st 
thr
ee 
me
ani
ngs 
of 
"m
axi
mu
m" 
rud
der 
def
lect
ion 
ang
le 
are 
im
por
tan
t to 
dist
ing
uis
h 
fro
m 
one 
ano
the
r:
  (a)	D
esi
gn 
ma
xi
mu
m. 
Th
e 
ma
xi
mu
m 
an
gle 
to 
wh
ich 
the 
ste
eri
ng 
en
gin
e 
can 
tur
n 
the 
rud
der
.
  (b)	M
ane
uve
r 
ma
xi
mu
m. 
Th
e 
ma
xi
mu
m 
ang
le 
that 
is 
spe
cifi
ed 
to 
be 
use
d 
in 
any 
par
ticu
lar 
ma
neu
ver
.
  (c)	M
axi
mu
m 
use
ful. 
For 
cert
ain 
ope
rati
ona
lly 
im­ 
por
tant 
ma
neu
ver
s 
suc
h 
as 
the 
ste
ady 
tur
n 
(Se
ctio
n 
6.1) 
or 
the 
dep
th-
cha
ngi
ng 
ma
neu
ver 
for 
a 
sub
ma
rin
e, 
the
re 
exi
sts 
a 
def
lect
ion 
ang
le 
whi
ch 
if 
exc
eed
ed 
yiel
ds 
no 
sig
nifi
can
t 
im
pro
ve
me
nt 
in 
the 
cha
ract
eris
tics 
of 
the 
ma
neu
ver. 
Thi
s is 
the 
ma
xi
mu
m 
use
ful 
def
lect
ion 
ang
le. 
De
cidi
ng 
of 
bot
h 
(a) 
and 
(b) 
dep
end
s 
on 
(c); 
hen
ce, 
mo
st 
of 
the 
dis
cus
sio
n 
of 
this 
sub
sec
tio
n 
con
­ 
cer
ns 
the 
ma
xi
mu
m 
use
ful 
rud
der 
def
lect
ion 
ang
le. 
For 
rud
der
s 
that 
exp
erie
nce 
an 
abr
upt 
dec
rea
se 
in 
lift 
at 
the 
stal
l 
ang
le, 
ma
xi
mu
m 
use
ful 
def
lect
ion 
ang
les 
are 
like
ly 
to 
app
rox
ima
te 
the 
stal
l 
ang
le, 
but 
as 
sho
wn 
in 
this 
sub
sec
tio
n, a 
ma
xi
mu
m 
use
ful 
rud
der 
def
lect
ion 
ang
le 
ma
y 
exi
st 
at 
ang
les 
of 
atta
ck 
less 
tha
n 
that 
of
stall.


0 ,. ....... . . .._. . ._....._...._.L,.......JC-.J._._-J...--'-......._--'---'--.........,
0	05	1.0	1.5	2.0
RATIO OF SHIP LENGTH TO STEADY TURNING RADIUS,·'/R
Fig. 214 Drift angle, /3, as a function of L/R




than the all-movable rudder area required  to achieve 
the most severe specified limit maneuver, then, as in­ 
dicated in Section 17.2, a horn rudder or a balanced 
rudder with fixed structure should be employed. Fig. 
144 may be used to determine the area of the movable 
part of a zero-balance rudder with fixed structure for
equal effectiveness with an all-movable rudder at  /3 =
0. Calculation of the required movable area of balanced 
rudders with fixed structure for the general case of /3 
0 and nonzero balance, and of the required movable 
area of horn rudders, is not yet possible for the reason
noted in the previous section.
  Free-stream information useful in the selection of 
rudder profile shape (sweep angle and taper ratio), 
section shape, tip shape, and thickness-chord ratio for 
all-movable rudders is contained in Section 14.5 and 
Tables 13 through 17. While this information is useful, 
it is not necessarily decisive. For example, considera­ 
tion of rudder area in the propeller race should also 
influence selection of rudder profile shape. For all-mov­ 
able rudders, structural rather than hydrodynamic 
considerations may dictate the selection of the root­ 
thickness/ chord ratio because the thickness is deter­ 
mined by the diameter of the rudder stock. Structural 
considerations are treated in Section 17.8. In practice, 
root-thickness/chord ratios greater than about 0.25 are 
avoided, to prevent flow separation and the possibility 
of vortex-excited vibration.
  

The possibility of the rudder's achieving an angle of attack 
exceeding the stall angle is far more likely dur­ ing transient 
maneuvers such as the overshoot ma­ neuver than during a 
steady turn. For example, when the rudder is laid over in the 
opposite direction to check an overshoot maneuver (see Fig. 18), 
the angle of at­ tack on the rudder may be larger than the 
deflection angle if the rudder deflection rate is fast enough.  On 
the other hand, Fig. 22 shows that in  a  steady  turn,  the angle 
of attack on the rudder is far less than the deflection angle. For 
this reason, deflection angles that are useful in a steady turn are 
likely to be far greater than those that are useful in an overshoot 
maneuver. Thus, consideration of the steady turn  will, in almost 
all cases, determine the magnitude of the design max­ imum 
rudder deflection angle.
The angle of attack at the rudder in a steady turn
is
a  = 8R -  /3R	(157)
with symbols as defined on Fig. 22. The value of the geometric 
drift angle at the rudder, /3R + Eis a func­ tion of the radius of 
the turning circle. For a rudder located a distance L/2 aft of the 
origin, /3R + E is related to the drift angle at the origin of  the 
ship,  /3, by
        tan (/3R + E) = tan /3 + R c L	(158)

 
Measurements of /3 made during the turning experi­ ments of 
the single-screw merchant ship models re­ ported in Fig. 213 
indicate that

          /3 ::::: 22.5 L/R	(/3 in degrees)	(159) which 
as shown in Fig. 214 is intermediate between


376


PRI
NCI
PLE
S 
OF 
NAV
AL 
ARC
HIT
ECT
URE



34
I	i
32	i	I
I	, , \ \ \ \ \ \ ·.	!
30 t------!--+--+- ''-t----:-..,..._--lt---+--+--1----1 STALL ANGLE,
l	ta•'l1	Oo= 1.2


28

f26


II	/


' ' ' ' 
,, ' ''- 
\


:::.
S24
Ill


I i  T j	7  /\V .,.,---+--+--¼------'--L--1---4 	1
I	I	/	'b_;.,. '	"  "  ' "." 


I  22 t----t--+-+.-   +:L'-+--  c....'-4--1----1---1  STALL  ANGLE


I'{	j	I
0


C.   ...,rt,,	, ,. \ \\ \\\\


U 20


I	J	I
I	I	I


Q .. ,,,,
\	.,,., - -


-+- - +-- - r--


-	--+      -	-1- - --.


f 18
fJ


! /	l	/	\/	1!
l


i 16	l
I
1!114	i
Cj
ffi 12

10
Ill
z   8
0

6
C     4
0
;	2
z
C
0

-2

-4

-6
I	-

1'                 ,,_ '
-8
0	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	I I	12	13	14	15
STEADY  TURNING DIAMETER+ LENGTH (STO/d
Fig. 215 Angle of ottack at rudder a, a functin of DIL and s. for tl,e panicular single-screw merchant ship hull forms (Shiba, 1960)




the two empirical expressions for /3 given in Section
6.1.
  Result.s reported by Shiba (1960) and Surber (1955) 
indicate that the straightening effect of  the  hull  and 
the propeller on the rudder is approximately a linear 
function of the geometric drift angle at the rudder:
E  -:=  j (/JR + E)  0	j  <  1.0
(160)




Combining Equations (157-160), the 
following expres­ sion for the angle of attack 
on the rudder of the models of Shiba (1960) in 
a steady turn is obtained:
a = 6R - { tan- 1 [tan (22.5 LIR)
+ 2R cos ( 2.5 LIR)] }   (l -	j)  (lGl)
The dashed contours plotted in Fig. 215 show a as


CONTROLLABILITY	377



a function of 6R and STDIL as computed from Equa­ 
tion (161) for a j-value of 0.23.
  This is the approximate value of j for the single­ 
screw, single rudder models of Shiba (1960) as com­ 
puted from Table 5 of the same author. The j-values 
computed from Eskigian (1956) and Surber (1955) are 
considerably larger. Equation 161 can be used to com­ 
pute values of a for any value of j for the models of 
Shiba (1960).
Some results of the turning tests with the (CB =
0.60, 0.70, and 0.80) models from Fig. 219 are super­ 
imposed on these dashed contours and displayed  on 
Fig. 215 as solid curves. These curves show, for ex­ 
ample, that the (CB = 0.60) (A'R  = 0.0125) model has 
a steady turning diameter of 6½ ship lengths  at  a 
rudder deflection angle of 30 deg, which  corresponds 
to an angle of attack of 18 deg on the rudder.
  One of the most striking features of Fig. 215 is that 
with the assumption of  j  =  0.23, the angle of  attack 
on the rudder is zero or negative for STDIL values as 
low as 1.5 for the (CB = 0.80) model. In other words, 
this model turns in a very small diameter with the 
rudder exerting little or no control force. This, in con­ 
junction with the fact that the (CB = 0.80) model of 
Shiba (1960) turns with zero rudder, suggests that this 
model may be unstable. To a lesser extent, the same 
comment applies to the (CB = 0.70) model.



utmost importance, to determine the adequacy of any 
proposed rudder, including its design maximum de­ 
flection angle, by means of model tests. This general 
preference for model tests prevails even though scal­ ing 
difficulties will arise as noted in Section 14.3. The 
maneuvering performance of any proposed ship design 
and guidance for design modification to improve ma­ 
neuvering performance can be accurately determined 
during the design stage by means of the experimental and 
semi-theoretical techniques described  in  Section, 8, 9, 
16.6 and 16.7.
  Constraint (c) of Section 17.1 tends to impose an 
upper limit on rudder deflection angle which is inde­ 
pendent of turning considerations. For example, cer­ 
tain types of otherwise efficient and suitable steering






  The approximate rudder stall angles as measured in 
the propeller race for the two rudders included in Fig. 
215 are also shown in that figure. The effect of stall 
which otherwise should be discernible on Fig. 215 for 
the (CB= 0.60)(A'R = 0.0125) model is not perceptible.
  In general, Fig. 215 shows that stall does not play 
a dominant role in determining the maximum useful 
rudder deflection angle in a steady turn for the models 
of Shiba (1960). For example, the (CB = 0.80) (A'R = 
0.0125) model shows almost no reduction in steady
turning diameter as a result of increasing the rudder 
deflection angle from 35 to 45 deg. Yet the angle of


..,
!;  8
.(.,), .
0	6
0111
:.: 4
0
.1.-,  2
2

0


(0)



c,, 0.60

 
c8 ,oeo


2	3	4	6
RULE	(bl


attack on the rudder even at 6R = 45 deg is below
stall. Clearly then, on some  of the models, the nature  
of the hull forces and moments and not the occurrence 
of stall is what limits the maximum useful rudder 
deflection angle.
  It is seen from Fig. 215 that for the three  models 
with the larger rudders,  rudder  deflection  angles 
larger than the common design maximum of 35 deg 
result in smaller diameter steady turns with no in­ 
crease in rudder area. For some of the models, deflec­ 
tion angles larger than 50 deg result in significant 
reductions in turning diameter. Information shown in 
Fig. 19 of Mandel (1953) indicates that deflection angles
as large as 65 deg may be useful for some ships. Thus,


1-	40
0
111:;l'30
a:0
"'    •  20
ii-. 10
0o, _


5 4
0:c
.&.,l..., 3
"':.2
,,fJ
a:	I






_.__ 	.2.....,..._3.... 	.._4 	5, 	....,6 •
RULE	(C)


it is not possible to generalize concerning the maximum


!c
...,


00	- - ,'-- -


..2. ........- 3--4.. 	....,5!-----,!s---•


rudder deflection angles that are likely to be useful.
  As a result, considering the state of the art of rudder 
design, it is preferable during development of a new 
ship design for which maneuvering performance is of


RUDDER DEFLECTION RATE 611DEG I SEC
(d)
 Fig. 216 Effect of rudder deflection rate on ship response for two Series 60 ships, 
L = 152.4m and (500 ft) and V = 14.8 knots (Eda and Crane, 1965)


378	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



TANKER (250 TYPE), F\JLLY LOAD L • 331m
APPROACH SPEED • 16 KNOTS 
RUDDER ANGLE '50 • 35 degrMS




APPROACH SPEED • 4 KNOTS

r- - - -.-..-\-,.,....,....._,,:.\:•


'	./





·• ..



2 i.--'---1- TRANSFER -.


•	RUODER RATE, J0  •    
3.0 deg/lac
+ RUOOER RATE,	•   2.3 deg/NC
•	RUDDER RATE,	• 
1.6 deg/lac



•.

5 sec. TIME INTERVAL




RUOOER EXECUTION




1.
"



0	1	2
LATERAL 
DISTANCE 
TRAVELED/  
SHIP 
LENGTH



2	3
LATERAL DISTANCE TRAVELED/   SHIP LENGTH, v;.. Yo/ L

Fig. 217    Enter-a-tum trajectory (Edo,  1983)










TANKER (250TYPE), FULLY LOADED
20"-20" ZIG ZAG
APPROACH SPEED  •  16 KNOTS
•	RUDDER RATE, J • 3.0 deg/sec


20 i


+ RUOOER RATE,


0
•	2.3 deg/sec


I !j!



iI -0
·40	20





100	200





•	RUDDER RATE,	• 1.6 
d9!>'NC
TIME t, sec.
400
'





5
0
0
I












Fig. 218 Zigzag maneuver response (Edo, 1983)


t.	f.,


CONTROLLABILITY	379



engines may not be suitable  for  mechanical  reasons 
for deflection angles larger than about 35 deg. Since 
other relatively inexpensive means of achieving a spec- 
ified turning diameter may be available, such as in- 
creasing rudder area, the problem of selecting the 
design maximum rudder deflection angle may require 
detailed cost studies of alternative means for its ul- 
timate resolution. Interesting to note  is  that  most 
Great Lakes ships and many naval vessels are  built 
with design maximum rudder deflection angles  up to 
45 deg.
   17.6	Rudder   Deflection   Rate.     Whereas	desired 
steady turning characteristics are a guide to the choice 
of the design rudder deflection angle, transient ma- 
neuvers (in which the period  of  time  that  the  rudder 
is in motion is relatively long compared to total ma- 
neuver time) are the major ingredients in determining 
needed rudder deflection rate. Such limit-maneuver 
abilities as zigzag  overshoot  characteristics  and time 
to change heading a small number of degrees are in- 
fluenced by rudder deflection rate. The rate, however, 
has no influence on the diameter of the steady turn, 
although it may have a very minor effect on the tactical 
diameter.
  Mandel (1953) explored quantitative relationships 
between rudder deflection rate and pertinent maneu- 
vering characteristics using full-scale turning trajec- 
tory data. Subsequently, predictions of nonlinear ship 
maneuvers were made by Eda and Crane (1965) to 
evaluate the effect of rudder rate on maneuvering per- 
formance for two ship designs (Series 60 hull forms 
with block coefficients 0.60 and 0.80)."Zigzagmaneuver 
trajectories at 35 deg-35 deg were computed for the 
152m long ship at approach speed of 14.8knots. Figure 
216 shows variations in time to reach 35 deg heading 
change from the original course, yaw angle overshoot, 
and lateral overshoot as functions of rudder rate, to- 
gether with a sample  time history  of ship response  as 
a definition diagram. It can be seen that quickness of 
response, an overshoot in yaw and sway, improve with 
increased rudder rate, but at the higher rudder rates, 
further improvements are insignificant. The pattern of 
behavior is almost identical for the two ships of dif- 
ferent block coefficients despite their quite different 
steering qualities.
  At present, a minimum rudder rate of 2Ysdeg/sec, 
which is independent  of  ship parameters,  is required 
by regulatory agencies and classification societies. As 
shown in Fig. 216 the rudder rate of 2Ysdeg/sec pro- 
vides zigzag-maneuver response reasonably close to 
what might be achieved if the rudder rate were made 
arbitrarily high, at least for vessels of 152 ml (50Q-ft) 
length at 14.8-knot approach speed. The law of dimin- 
ishing returns tends to apply at rates beyond this pre- 
scribed rudder rate.
  Dimensional analysis leads to the expectation that  
the rudder rate should be directly related to ship size 
and speed. Effort has been made to evaluate the effect











of rudder rate as well as rudder size on the perform- 
ance of a large tanker (250,000 dwt) in a series of 
digital computer simulations (Eda, 1976). Available 
captive model data were utilized to formulate a real- 
istic mathematical model.
  Fig. 217, for example, shows turning  trajectories 
with application of 35-deg rudder angle at approach 
speeds of 16 knots and 4 knots. These trajectories 
show that the effect of rudder angular rate  is much 
less  at the lower speed (4 knots) than at the higher 
speed (16 knots). Fig. 218 shows 20 deg-20 deg zigzag 
maneuver response at approach speeds of 16 and 4 
knots. These figures also indicate an effect of rudder 
angular  rate that is much like that shown for turning.
A summary  chart  is  shown in Fig.  219 as  a  result
of a series of entering-turn maneuvers. Advance and 
transfer in units of ship length are shown on the basis 
of  rudder   angular   rate  for  three  different  
approach


 	 





speeds (16, 8 and 4 knots). Advance and transfer are 
longitudinal and lateral distances traveled from  the 
time of rudder command to the time of 90 deg heading 
change, as shown in Fig. 217.
  The figures show that the advance  is reduced  with 
an increase of rudder  angular  rate  but  that  the  rate 
of reduction becomes insignificant in the higher range 
of rudder rates, and that the effect of rudder rate on 
advance becomes insignificant at low speeds. At all 
speeds examined, transfer is influenced very little by 
the rudder angular rate.
  Fig. 220 shows summary charts from a series of 20 
deg-20 deg Z-maneuvers at speeds of 16,8, and 4 knots.


Time to the second and third rudder executions, yaw 
overshoot, and lateral path overshoot  are  shown  on 
the basis of rudder angular rate in these charts. It  is 
seen that quickness of response and overshoots in 
yaw and sway are all improved with an increase of 
rudder rate, but that these improvements become  
unimpor- tant at rudder rates greater than 
approximately 2 deg/ sec. This tendency is like that 
shown in Fig. 216 except that the tendencies appear at 
lower rudder rates owing of course, to longer ship 
length without much differ- ence in speed. In addition 
the large full-form tanker loses more speed in turning 
than does the cargo  ship (16 to 6 knots, versus 14.8 
to 9 knots).


























  Taplin and Atkinson (1987) performed some full- 
scale tests on the effect of rudder rate on the highly 
maneuverable	U.S. Coast Guard cutter  Gallatin. 
Many test variations were tried, and the  effectiveness 
of higher rudder rates in correcting a "helmsman er- 
ror" was  studied.  Fig. 221 shows overshoot  angles in 
a zigzag maneuver for various rudder angle commands 
(overshoot was measured after a 20-deg change of 
heading was achieved). When larger rudder angles are 
applied, it is seen that increased rudder rate is even 
more advantageous. Effectiveness in checking swings 
was studied further with angles and times required to 
check steady turns as shown in Fig. 222.
  "Helmsman's error" tests were also developed and 
performed to measure the effects of turning the rudder 
in the wrong direction. From a steady base course, an 
initial rudder execute is made followed by corrective 
opposite helm after a delay representing the time to 
discover the helm error and commense corrective ac- 
tion. Results show that for this highly maneuverable 
ship, a higher rudder rate results quickly in a  higher 
rate of swing that is difficult to check in the "shifted 
rudder" phase. With the prudent application of mod- 
erate rudder angles, however, early detection of error 
and higher rudder rates can result in smaller excur- 
sions. Future trials with other vessel types should yield 
further information in this area.
  If an acceptable rudder rate for a given vessel design 
can be decided on, then the rudder rate for similar 
vessels of different size and speed may be estimated  
bv use of the relationship.


382	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE














I!.,- a.

30

20

10




-30

-20

-10























Rudder 
Angle, "•






















Sh;p 
Speed 
IO knots


an 
uppe
r 
limit 
on 
the 
rudd
er 
defle
ction 
rate. 
Incr
ease
d 
rate 
not 
only 
incre
ases 
the 
pow
er 
dem
and 
on 
the 
steer
­ ing 
engi
ne, 
but it 
also 
incre
ases 
rudd
er 
torq
ue 
sligh
tly. 
Exce
pt 
for 
high
-
spee
d 
ship
s 
with 
spec
ial 
resp
onse 
re­ 
quir
eme
nts, 
few 
ship
s 
exce
ed 
the 
regu
lator
y 2¼ 
deg/ 
sec 
rate. 
On 
high
-
spee
d 
cont
ainer
ship
s 
with 
conc
ern 
for 
carg
o 
dam
age 
from 
tight 
turns 
at 
high 
spee
d, a 
rate 
limit
ing 
mec
hani
sm 
is 
som
etim
es 
insta
lled 
to 
re­ 
duce 
the 
rate 
whe
n 
the 
ship 
is 
trave
lling 
fast.
17.7	S
e
l
e
d
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
S
e
d
i
o
n
 
S
h
a
p
e
.
 
T
h
e
 
s
e
l
e
c
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
chor
dwis
e 
secti
on 
shap
e, 
give
n 
rudd
er 
locat
ion 
and 
size, 
amo
ng 
othe
r 
conc
erns, 
is 
gove
rned 
by 
the 
follo
w­ 
ing 
ideal 
cons
ider
atio
ns:
•	H
i
g
h
e
s
t 
p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e 
m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
l
i
f
t
,
•	m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
s
l
o
p
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
l
i
f
t
 
c
u
r
v
e
 
w
i
t
h
 
r
e
s
p
e
c
t
 
t
o
 
a
n
g
l
e
 
o
f
 
a
t
t
a
c
k
,
•	m
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
r
e
s
i
s
t
a
n
c
e
 
t
o
 
c
a
v
i
t
a
t
i
o
n
,
•	m
i
n
i
m
u
m
 
d
r
a
g
 
a
n
d
 
s
h
a
f
t 
p
o
w
e
r
,
•	f
a
v
o
r
a
b
l
e 
t
o
r
q
u
e 
c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
i
s
t
i
c
s
,
•	e
a
s
e 
o
f 
f
a
b
r
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
  Th
e 
com
paris
on of 
wind
-
tunn
el 
test 
resul
ts 
reve
als 
that 
the 
NA
CA 
sym
metr
ical 
secti
on 
shap
e 
(Om
cx 
Se­ 
ries 
wher
e 
XX 
repre
sents 
a 
two-
digit 
num
ber 
indic
at­ 
ing 
thick
ness 
as a 
perc
ent 
of 
chor
d  
lengt
h)  is 
one 
of 
the 
most 
desir
able 
secti
ons 
for 
rudd
ers 
(See 
also


Reduction in rudder angle to prevent stal I

Fig. 223 Rudder angle and drift angle at rudder position during zigzag
maneuver  (Eda, 1983)




  When the rudder is not located abaft a propeller or 
integral skeg, the effective rudder angle can be con­ 
sidered as an algebraic sum of actual rudder angle 
and drift angle at the location of rudder
  (This simple summation is not applicable to the rud­ 
der abaft a propeller because of the predominant effect 
of the propeller stream onto the rudder, making the 
local drift angle effect insignificant).
  Fig. 223 shows the relationship between actual rud­ 
der angle 6a and geometric drift angle at the rudder 
stock; the data are from full-scale zigzag maneuvers. 
Possible in this maneuver is to have a situation in which 
the effective rudder angle exceeds the stall angle, 
thereby introducing the possibility of substantial loss 
in rudder force.
  The ideal rate of rudder deflection is one that allows 
the rudder to generate its maximum possible lift when 
required, that is, fully utilizing the rudder without 
exceeding the stall angle. The rudder should be de­ 
flected at the maximum rate to just below the stall 
angle to initiate or check a maneuver. Then the rudder 
angular rate should be reduced to the rate of change 
of f3a as indicated by a dotted line in Fig. 223. This 
deliberate variation in rudder rate pertains especially 
to vessels constructed to allow very large rudder an­ 
gles, say 45 deg or greater. As with the rudder de­ 
flection angle, constraint (c) of Section 17.1 imposes


Thieme, 1965, for other desirable choices).
  Table 38 shows the results of free-stream wind-tun­ 
nel tests of the NACA symmetrical section. A section
shape is shown in Fig. 224. Results are given for 
the highest test Reynolds number of 2.7 x 106 for 
all­ movable foils having a thickness ratio of 6.7 
and an effective aspect ratio of 2.0.
  The trailing edge of the rudder is deliberately in­ 
tended to have noticeable thickness rather than to ta­ 
per to a knife or feather edge. The bluntness of the 
trailing edge allows increased ruggedness of construc­ 
tion, which is especially useful for astern operation. 
The bluntness is also believed, in some cases, to cause 
appreciably greater lift with little penalty in increased 
drag, although the slope of the curve of lift  versus 
angle of attack is but slightly affected.
  Fig. 225 shows the basic rudder foil chord-wise 
cross section with a table of ordinates, for a rudder 
with a thickness of 20 percent of the chord. (Points 
obtained from the Gottingen 398 and the Clark Y 
sections are also plotted on the figure, for 
comparison.)
The ordinate of the profile is given by an equation
of the form

where the chord is expressed in fractions of chord 
length along the x-axis from O to 1. The constants 
were determined from imposed conditions; e.g., the 
maxi­ mum ordinate was set at 0.1 chord length at 
abscissa
0.3	chord length. NACA sections having any desired 
maximum thickness, t, can be obtained by multiplying 
the basic ordinates by the proper factor, as follows:


CONTROLLABILITY	383


•	(0:L)


Table 38-Wind Tunnel 
Test Results of NACA 
Rudder Section
Maximum	St.all	Dra


a	a-o
 0.041	


Lift
	ang
le,
	Coe
fficient
Coefficient	deg	a  = 0
1.32
	28.
7
	0.0
09


•	(oCLIoa).._0  = Slo:ee of the lift coefficient curve with respect to angle of att.ack
(a)	m degrees at a = 0.




± Yi = _t_ (0.29690 .Jx - 0.12600x 
0.20
-  0.35160x2 + 0.28430x3 -  0.10150x4)	(164)
The profiles derived are shown in Fig. 226. What ap­ 
pear as threadlike leading and trailing edges in these 
profiles are merely remnants of cen rlines use in 
drafting. The leading edge has theoretically zero thick­ 
ness at the tangent to the curve of cross section, but 
the trailing edge has finite thickness as a consequence 
of the sum of the a-coefficients being greater than zero 
(at x equal to unity, that is, full chord length):
  The characteristics of symmetric profiles havmg var­ 
ious thickness ratio are shown in Fig. 227a and b and 
in Table 39. These characteristics are based on infinite 
span. Characteristics of the rudder of small a pect 
ratio are different. Figs. 228 and 229 show comparisons 
of characteristics for thickness variations.
  Sections with greater thickness (0018 through 0025) 
have hydrodynamic advantages, namely (1) greater 
stall angle (larger maximum lift coefficient) and (2) 
relatively constant location of center of-pressure. The 
drag increase with thic ness is relatively small. hick 
sections are also supenor from a structural pomt of 
view. A limit on thickness is imposed by root-thickness 
chord ratio considerations as discussed near the end 
of Section 17.4.
  17.8  Steering   Gear   Torque   and   Rudder   Bal­ 
ance. The process of rudder design is usually con­ 
ducted in two parts: (a) selection of the geometric

;; 15



parameters and turning rate necessary to develop 
the desired ship turning characteristics, and (b) 
calculation of the force and torque loadings on the 
arrangement including the steering gear that must 
control the rud­ der movements. As has been noted 
by Harrington (1981), Hagen (1972), Asinovsky 
(1985), and others, prediction of full-scale torque 
loadings is a problem that has not been satisfactorily 
solved in spite of many years of effort in perfecting 
design methods.
  Determination of hydrodynamic forces and torque 
requires accurate assessment of hull wake, propeller 
race, hull drift angle, and change in rudder angle of 
attack as the hull turns, in addition to  the effects  of  
the arrangement of the particular rudder under anal­ 
ysis. Another component of importance derives from 
frictional losses in the rudderstock bearings and steer­ 
ing gear driving mechanisms.
  Empirical formulas for estimating rudder forces and 
moments are given by Jaeger (1955) and  Attwood  et 
al. (1953). All have shortcomings, but the method of 
Joessel, based on experiments with a flat rectangular 
plate (See "Steering" by Schoenherr as cited by 
Rossell and Chapman, 1939), has gained wide 
acceptance de­ spite its own shortcomings, which 
include some phys­ ical ones:
Q  = 0.811  Av 2w sin a	(165)
and
=  (0.195 + 0.305 sin a)	(166)
w


::
0
0	10
:,:
.u..


CHOR
D (c;)


0	5
,t
X • T.  OF  CIIORO   ("I. C


100	90
TAIL

X	%C	y


·oc	70
---
%C--
-


so	0	)0

---
%c·--
-	%C
X



0	0
1.25	2.63
2.50	3.63
5.00	4.94
7.50	5.83


NACA 
Symmetrical 
Section, Cit = 6.07
10.00
	6.5
0
	40.
00
	8.0
6
15.00
	7.4
2
	50.
00
	7.3
5
20.00
	7.9
7
	60.
00
	6.3
4
25.00
	8.2
5
	70.
00
	5.0
9
30.00
	8.3
3
Fig. 224 NACA section 
shape with ordinates



80.00
	3.
64
90.00
	2.
01
95.00
	1.
12
100.00
	0.
17


384	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE
.Ir/·.-•-•-•	•-•--, 	
I	_6



-- N.·A. C. A. family


Oy  F



-
-
·
-
-
-
•
-
-
-
-
:
:
 
C
l
o
r
k
 
Y


I-	.......4-  •-- ♦	'

 


_	_ --•--"
◆	•	•	I

 


o Go.ff .JSS
I	I	I

 	 	 


-.  0	.I:	.2   .	.3	.4	.S	.	.6	.7	.8	.!J	1.0
\ zy •Q23590../x- Q/2500:x: -Q35l50:x' + 0.28430 x.' - Q /0l50 x 4
Belie ordinate, of N.A.C.A. family airfoil& (7,crccnl of chord)



Stll••••••,


0  I 1.  
I2.IIl5.0	7.$     l10  .   :  15	:  20•	i 2$	:  31)	140  I-	$0	IGO	! 70	-I so  I00	l I"	i100


I Ord•••••	0I 3.157	4.W	$.1125


7. UOO 1    7. l'Q5 ·     ll. 900.,    t•.    ,  u. OO'l  , 10. 003j 
II. 0,%	8. 823      7. 000 ,   G. 107I •.372     2. 413 1     I. 3H I o. 210
I	!	I	I     .	I	I ·---------


L.E. radius. 4.40.

Fig. 225    Thickness variation



Table 39-Characteristics of NACA Sections Having Various Thickness 
(Aspect Ratio Unlimited. Test Reynolds Number = 3.2 X 106)



Chord/ 
Thickness
4.0
4.8
5.6
6.7
8.3
11.1
16.7

where



NACA 
Series 
Designati
on
0025
0021
0018
0015
0012
0009
0006



 
0.089
0.094
0.098
0.100
0.101
0.101
0.102


M
a
x
i
m
u
m
 
L
i
f
t
 
C
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
1
.
2
0
1
.
3
8
1
.
4
0
1
.
5
3
1
.
5
3
1
.
2
7
0
.
8
8

W 1 (0.195 
+ 0.305 
sin a)-b) 
h


D
r
a
J
 
C
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
 
a
t
a
 
=
 
0
0
.
0
1
4
0
.
0
1
2
0
.
0
1
1
0
.
0
0
9
0
.
0
0
8
0
.
0
0
7
0
.
0
0
6

h
2
  
]


Q = rudder torque about leading edge of plate, ft.
lb
A = area of plate, ft 2


X  [ (	0.195  + 0.305 sin a	Wi 1 +w 2 2
0.811 v2sin a


v = water velocity, fps
<a> = plate width, ft
a = angle of attack, deg
x = distance from leading edge to center of pres­


Q.,.tern = Kut.em 0.195+ 0.305 sin a
X[(a - w1(0.195 + 0.305 sin a))w1h1
+ w 2h (0.805 - 0.305 sin a)]


sure, ft	2 2


By combining Equations (165) and (166) to find Qlx,
the resultant force on a plate is determined to be


Whicker and Fehlner (1958) provide a logical 
design theory for calculating rudder forces 
and their spanwise and chordwise locations. 
Also included are wind-tunnel


F=	Q=	0.811 Av2sin a	(
x	0.195 + 0.305 sin a


167 )	 	


where F is the resultant force on the plate in lb. The 
equations were used in conjunction with Joessel coef­ 
ficients (Kaheacl·and K.-J developed for various ship 
types, and many influences such as rudderstock bear­ 
ing friction were considered to be included. Harrington 
(1981) describes the use of the Joessel method asap­ 
plied in Fig. 237 to a horn-type rudder. The rudder is 
broken into two rectangles, and expressions for the 
ahead and astern rudder torques become as follows 
upon application of Equations (165), (166), and (167), 
and the suitable Joessel coefficient:
Qaheacl = Kahead 0.811 v2sin a	(168)


0006

 
00('9
--<.._::::= ?.::


<=-=:::>--

Fig. 226 NACA Symmetrical airfoils


CONTROLLABILITY	385
CHARACTERISTICS OF AIRFOIL SECTIONS FROM TESTS IN VARIABLE-DENSITY WIND TUNNEL
























'-
0
,I.!
,-.,--,--1--;-+-i-i-B..g.'
........_..--i-,z
-8






























Fig. 227(a) and (b) NACA 0018 and 0021 airfoils


386	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



1·6 ,.--.---..--....----,.-,
o,  - 6
l·S  '6	.-+--;.--1---1



RUDD
ER 
STOC
K
1--1rr::-:_::_ ---=d
I	I
I	I
I	I
I
I
hz






f
O·Bi---., -;c.._ --1-.....:+:=:,;:;:::=t---l


I I I I
1---

h1
I


---- wz --


,--------
'I
rI 	I -
I





O...._ - -.,.-c., 	.""_, 	.	,
0	S	W	W H B
•	(d,g I
Fig. 228 Lift coefficients of NACA symmetrical airfoils
0·400-r-6 -1 r7f -r·;
l,•'••Q•'t:.v 1I ••I 11 1••._••'•I1
0·35	-	--r	-
0·30.---i--t--t·- 'ITtri-·J
'	-t·'·i'.·O·'"


I	I
I	I
I	I
I	I
I	I	I
I	I	I
I I 		I
---1 .J-J
---- w,	1
Fig. 230 Model of a hom•type rudder used with the Joessel 
method


t::= -----A.,...-.,_-;T 
o-,o---tPn	i
o-os	Lt-: -.....---1--..j.-
                              l       40



Fig. 229 Drag coefficients of NACA symmetrical airfoils






test results at Reynolds numbers up to about 3 million, 
for a systematic family of all-movable control surfaces 
including some astern data.
The computation of rudderstock size requires knowl-


-30


edge of:	_	_
  {a) The maximum design value of  the  resultant 
force on the rudder.
  {b) The location of the spanwise center of pressure 
(CP); corresponding to the maximum resultant force.
(c)   The location  of  the rudder bearings.	Fig. 231 Typical torque versus angle of attack relationship


CONTROLLABILITY	387



The computation of rudder-stock location and steering­ 
gear torque for all rudders requires knowledge of:
  (ti) The rudder normal force  F and  the location  of 
the chordwise center of  pressure  (CP)0 as  a  function 
of rudder angle of attack at the maximum ship speed.
(e) Bearing radii and coefficients of friction.
  On ships that have no restrictions on use of the 
rudder in going astern, items a, b, and d have to be 
known for both maximum ahead and maximum astern 
speeds. On recent naval ships, there has been recog­ 
nition of the following:
  (a)	Typical naval combatant ships have large as­ 
tern power and hence are capable of correspondingly 
high astern speed.
  (b)	Adequate design for that astern speed would 
require large, heavy steering gear.
  (c)	It seems reasonable to allow use of full astern 
power for crash stops, but there is no need to go astern 
at high speed after stopping.
  (ti) Accordingly, instruction plates are provided 
limiting the sustained astern shaft rotational speed to 
that which permits steering gear operation within the 
ahead limits.
  (e) The acceptance trials include demonstration  of 
the workability of the Instruction Plate limit.
  Thus, design practice for naval combatant ships 
(Taplin, 1960) bases the calculation of rudder-stock 
size, stock location, and steering-gear torque on the 
ahead condition.
Appendixes A and B of Taplin (1960) detail the com-



putation of items 1 and 4 for all-movable rudders 
using the free-stream data of Whicker and Fehlner 
(1958). However, in order to use the free-stream 
data to com­ pute the maximum design value of the 
normal force, assumptions have to be made 
concerning
  (a)	The maximum angle of  attack  that the  rudder 
is likely to encounter, amax·
(b)	The maximum flow velocity averaged over the
rudder, (VR)max•
(c)	Rudder effective aspect ratio, a.
  Taplin (1960) takes the angle of attack to be 5/7 of 
the rudder deflection angle for all rudders. For 
rudders suffering a loss of lift at stall, Mandel (1953) 
suggests that the normal force at stall be taken as the 
maximum design value.
  For the flow velocity averaged over the rudder, 
VR, Taplin (1960) uses the assumption that for 
rudders in the propeller race:
VR  =  k(l + Sa)V	(169)
where k has a value between  0.8 and 1.0,  depending 
on how much of the rudder area is located in the pro­ 
peller race, and Sa is the propeller apparent slip ratio. 
Fig. 250 contains somewhat more refined data than 
what is implied by Equation (169).
  In Section 14.6, the effective aspect ratio of a 
control surface tested against a body of revolution 
hull was compared to the effective aspect ratio of the 
same control surface tested against a groundboard. It 
was shown that in the former case







 	 

Fig. 232 Ship A stern arrangement and support details


388	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Table 40-Ahead Rudder Torque Calculations for a Typical Spade Rudder Using Cross-faired Test Data (Whicker and
Fuhlner,  1958) (Harrington, 1981)
NOTE: These calculations are for 20-deg rudder angle-of-attack position for Ship A, as defined by Figs. 232 and Table 41 
Propeller  thrust  =  326 Pe/V(l -   t)	T	251 900 lb	114,262 Kg
Speed  of  advance  = 1.69  V(l -   w)	v	33.61 fps	10.24 m/s
D	.	O 994  2+	4T	p	1924.7 psf	1.943 MPa


Taper ratio = X5/ (X1 + XJ
Mean chord  = 0.5(X1   + X2   + Xs)
Sweep angle  = ta n_1[  0.25(X5 -    X1 -   X2) + X2-          X4] 
Rudder angle
Effective  aspect ratio =	3 ( 2 - ;) 
Data uncorrected for taper ratio:
lift coefficient (see Figs. 240 and 241)
drag coefficient (see Figs. 242 and 243) 
center of pressure (see Figs. 244 and 245)
Lif	ff	1.63A  -   0.73(	a  )  2


A	0.875
c	16.875 ft	5.143 m
0	4.82 deg

a	20deg
a	2.054
CL1	0.942
Cv1	0.163
GP,,	0.220
l:::.CL	0.041


t coe  . corr. =	a


_57 3


Corrected lift coeff. = CL 1 + l:::.CL


CL2	0.983


Drag coeff. correction =_


L-2


a	L,
83


l:::.Cv	0.014


1	1


CL 2 cos a + Cv2 sin a


CN2	0.984


(0.25-CP;;.)CN, - 1 l:::.CL


Ci.rc/ 42	0.00773


Corr. center of pressure = 0.25 - 
Normal force = pcXaCN2


C /4
 
M;C,
N,


GP;;,	0.242
F	639 200 lb	315,000 kg


Hydrodynamic torque = 12F(c CPc, - X 2 ; X 4 )
Rudderstock bearing friction


QH	-3.84  X  106   in.-lb	43.4 X 
104 N .m


=	d1 F(0.42Xa + X9)
/J,i  2	X


+ /J,2


F(0.42Xa + Xs + Xs)
2	Xs


QF	2.32  X 
106 in.-lb	26.45 
X 104 N -m


Rudder  torque displacing  =  Qr + QH
Rudder  torque  restoring  =  Qr  - QH




a  = (2  - 0.0llla) a0	0  < a  < 27 deg	(170)
a  = 1.5 a0	a  = 31 deg (stall angle)


QD	-1.52  X 106     in.-lb	17.32 X  104  N-m
QR	6.16  X 106 in.-lb	70.24  X  104  N-m






in a larger maximum resultant force than 
Equation (171). However, if the other 
assumptions are used, use of Equation (171) is 
recommended.


In contrast to these data, Taplin (1960) suggests for 
rudders where the gap is considered small at a = 0 
and large at a = amax that  the effective  aspect  ratio 
be taken as:
  

By using the preceding three assumptions and 
the freestream data, the maximum bending 
moment, (Q8M )max  and   the   maximum   
hydrodynamic   torque, (QH)max acting on the 
rudder stock may be computed
as follows:


a = (2 - _::_) aa
amax


(171)


(QH)max = F(d - 
CP;)



(120d)


It is clear that the use of Equation (170) would result


(QBM)max = (£ 2 + D2)½ (CP; + b)


(172)


CONTROLLABILITY	389



where F, L, D, CP;, and CP; are determined at  a  = 
Omax and Vr = ( Vr)max and b is the distance from the 
root chord of the rudder to the center of the lower 
bearing supporting the rudder.
  If the chordwise center of pressure on a rudder 
remained in a fixed location as the angle of attack on 
the rudder increased, it would be desirable always to 
locate the rudder stock just forward of the center of 
pressure. This would insure a low maximum torque 
value and in the event that the rudder were inadvert­ 
ently freed, the rudder would tend to trail at 6R = 0
deg as  long  as  a  = 0 deg.  Unfortunately,  on  most











.!.,!.




I.I


,..

12




1.0


rudders the center of pressure moves aft  as  the angle 
of attack increases. Therefore, in order to reduce the 
maximum torque value, most ship rudders are not de­ 
signed as trailing rudders; rather, the practice, ac­ 
cording to Taplin (1960) and Comstock (discussion of 
Mandel (1953)), is to determine the location of the stock 
on the basis that the hydrodynamic torque should be 
zero at  an angle of attack  of about 10 to 15 deg. Thus, 
a typical torque versus angle of attack curve takes the 
form shown in Fig. 231. It is clear from  this  Figure 
that if the zero torque point were taken at  a  larger 
angle of attack, the maximum torque at a = ± amax 
could be significantly reduced. Nevertheless, the 10 to


J
8...
..



.2

























1.0





















15	20	2.,	30
EFFECTIVE ASPECl RATIO


15-deg zero torque point is used in the interests of 
minimizing the power required for routine steering and 
coursekeeping, which on most ships seldom requires 
more than 10 to 15 degree of rudder angle.
  As is shown in Fig. 231, such  a  rudder  is unstable 
at a = O; if  it were freed,  the rudder.would flop over 
to either plus or minus 15 deg. Romahn and Thieme 
(1957) have pointed out that this instability may pro­ 
duce rattling, shock, and excessive wear in geared 
steering mechanisms. Their recommendation is that 
rudders should be at least neutrally stable at a = 0


Fig. 233 lift coefficient, sweep angle of O deg (Harrington, 1981)

NOTU,
: u! : G E OF +11 DEGREES l---t---t-r-t7"'--t'.-:,,--t--;oF---t--:.1
•	DEY£LDP£D FAOM Fl&UAU
1.1	•S,IG,AIIDIJOFDTIII
REl'OATW


deg; that is, the rudder stock should be located at the 
(a = 0 deg) position of the center of pressure. But 
unless means are discovered for reducing the center­ 
of-pressure travel as a is increased, this recommen­ 
dation leads to the requirement for larger steering­
gear capacity.
  Harrington (1981) presented extensive trial results 
and comparative analyses using improvements on the 
Whicker and Fehlner (1958) methods for predicting 
torque.  The calculation  method  is presented  in Table
40. Figs. 233-238 provide cross-plots of lift coefficient, 
drag coefficient, and chordwise center of pressure for 
zero  and  +11-deg sweep  angles.  These  figures were
adapted from Whicker and Felhner (1958) to simplify 
the calculations. In order to permit projections beyond 
the stall angle indicated by the model test data, ex­ 
trapolations of the original data are shown on these 
figures as dashed lines for rudder  angles  of  attack  
that exceed the predicted stall angle. These extrapo­ 
lations provide insight into the risk involved if stall 
does not occur as predicted.


1.2



.?.. u
I•
ii
:;:
:::;

..
..

.2




0
I	.5

































I.I
EFFECTIY£ AIIECT RATIO


--
--









2.1


In the calculations  given in Table 40, the velocity of	Fig. 234 lift coefficient, sweep angle of +11 deg (Harrington, 1981)


390	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE























D	.s	1.0	1.5	2.0	2.5	3.0
EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO
Fig. 235 Drag coefficient sweep angle of O deg (Harrington, 1981)



.QI



0	.5	1.S
EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO


Fig. 237 Chordwise center of pressure, sweep angle of  O deg  (Harrington, 
1981)
.1






.6



.s

.J.i   ..
8







.,
;.:, .






.34

.32

.31

.21

.211




22


,


I'-
,;: .:...
-












-
-
-
-
-


:	.3
0





.2


u       .211	-
.11

.14


.12

ID






.5	1.5	2.5
EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO
Fig. 236 Drag coefficient sweep angle of +11 deg (Harrington, 1981)



.DI
.5




1.5

EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO



2.5



the water over the rudder is assumed to be  uniform, 
and a correction is made for the average wake effects 
and the augmented water  velocity  due to  the  effects 
of the propeller race. The speed-of-advance calculation 
(wake effect) is familiar, but the dynamic pressure 
calculation (propeller race effect) may be unfamiliar. 
Here it is assumed that the propeller actuator-disk


Fig. 238 Chordwise center of pressure, sweep angle of +11 deg (Harrington,
1981
)

theory, as described by Rossell and Chapman (1958, 
Schonherr) applies, and the propeller thrust is ex­ 
pressed as

(173)


CONTROLLABILITY	391

Table 41-Descriptive Data f?r Three of the Six Ships Instrumented During Steering Trials (Harrington, 1981. Also see
Figs. 232 and  240.)
Ship	A	B	C
Hull: length	ft	550	1143	916
beam	ft	82	228	135
draft	ft	19.9	74	36
displacement (trial)	tons	13 800	450 600	97 098
Rudder type	spade	shoe	horn
1


40000
thrust deduction factor	t	0.122	0.267	0.12
wake fraction	w	0.12	0.668	0.13
1,>ropeller diameter	D	ft	20	31.5	25
Sh1a, astern speed (trial)	knots	10	4.6	9.5
Ru  der dimensions:	X1	ft	12.29	25.25	12.34
x. 
x6
x9


bronze
25.5









where
T = propeller thrust
A = propeller disk area
p = water density
v = propeller speed of advance
z = velocity imparted to the water by the propeller
This equation can be combined with the usual expres­ 
sion for dynamic pressure to eliminate z and form the 
following expression for the dynamic pressure, p:
p  = e (z + v)2   = !!.v2   + '!_	(174)
2	2	A

This is the basic form of the expression used in Table
40.
  The effective aspect ratio (slenderness ratio or span­ 
to-width ratio) of most rudders does not lend itself to


an exact evaluation, and this inexactitude introduces 
unavoidable inaccuracies into the calculations. As can be 
imagined, a very  high  aspect  ratio  would suggest a long, 
continuous lifting surface where the break­ down of lift due 
to end effects is minimal and the flow conditions are ideally 
suited to development of lift at low angles of attack.
  One means of effectively increasing the aspect ratio of a 
rudder is to develop an arrangement in which the rudder is 
bounded on one end by a  surface  that is in the plane of the 
flow. If the bounding surface com­ pletely seals the end of the 
rudder, thereby eliminating cross-flows and end losses, a 
mirror-image effect is achieved and the "effective" aspect 
ratio is equal to twice the geometric aspect ratio. This 
condition may exist in the case of the fairwater diving planes 
on some submarines where the  fairwater  diving  planes  abut 
the sail, which is nearly plane-sided, thereby providing 
mirror-image conditions. However, the opportunity to


392	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




TOTAL TORQUE WHEN RESTORING, I
QR"'QF-QH
I
I
I
I
I


I
1-----¥-,---i---1----4--->.-l---'---1,C--:..,'.-+-_-I







\
\
\
\

\
\
\
a


provide a mirror effect at all angles of 
attack seldom arises in the design of 
rudders, because the hull sur­ face in 
way of the rudder is rarely flat.
  Harrington (1981) notes that the 
frictional  torque can be predicted by 
assuming that the position of the 
spanwise center of pressure is located  
42 percent  of the span distance from the 
root chord and  assuming that the rudder 
normal force is equal to the rudder 
resultant force. On these assumptions, 
which are suf­ ficiently accurate for the 
purpose, the loads carried by the upper 
and lower rudderstock bearings are 
readily determined. Then, with the 
bearing loads and stock diameter known, 
the bearing frictional torque can be 
computed if the friction coefficient is 
known. Selecting reasonable values for 
coefficients of friction presents no 
serious difficulty, given the materials 
and lubricants normally used. Based on 
the information provided by


z	\
\


HYDRODYNAMIC TORQUE WMEN 
D15'1.ACING, 0,,
11	15	lQ	30
RUDDER ANGLE DF ATTACK IDEGI


Taplin (1960), Smith (1967), 
standard handbooks, a fric­ tion 
coefficient of 0.2 for reinforced 
laminated phenolic (such as 
Micarta) bearings appears 
reasonable.
  The frictional torque is 
significant as shown in Fig. 
239, which graphs typical 
torque elements during a 
simple maneuver. The Qv curve 
represents the sum of


Fig. 239 Rudder torque elements during a simple  maneuver  (Harrington, 
1981)


the frictional and hydrodynamic components. 
Move­ ment of the rudder from centerline 
would  entail torques following the curve until 
the ordered angle is




I	HORN RUDDER
Xa
L
f
X10
 	 



,,_   


1	X4
X5



Fig. 240 Ship C stern arrangement and support details


CONTROLLABILITY	393





1.4G



1.20



1.111 -
,!
..    5u
$
3
.,	.• iu

40   z



.10	20


10	15	20	,.	JO	35



stock for the DE1040 during zigzag maneuvers. A 
very comprehensive analysis was described which 
predicted the two values quite well. Harrington noted 
that the figure  helps  illustrate  the  accuracies  
required  in  de­
sign. Maximum torque based on ram pressure data is 
shown at about 0.994 x 106 N,m (8.8 x 106 in.-lb) with
the strain gage torque at 0.768 x 106   N ,m  (6.8 x 
106
in.-lb). Normal force on the DE-1040 rudder at stall is 
estimated to be about 320,000 kg (700,000 lb); there­ 
fore, if the rudderstock had been moved aft in the 
rudder just about 8 cm (3 in.), the design rating would 
not have been exceeded. If it had been moved aft 18  
cm, however, the steering engine may have been con­ 
sidered to be overrated. With  the  mean  chord  at  3.5 
m (11 ft), considerable accuracy in locating  the  stock 
is thus required.



RUDDER ANGLE IDEG)
Fig. 241 Hinge moment and normal force coefficients of rudder area abaft 
horn (Harrington, 1981)




reached at Point a. The rudder is then held in position 
by the hydraulic ram pressure, and small movements 
tend to dissipate the effects of friction in making the 
transition  to Point  b on  the  Qn curve.  A drift angle is
assumed  by the  vessel,  causing  movement  to point c.
If the rudder is then ordered to centerline, the process



9
IC
g 8
::,
a:
7
cCcl
6
 



         

 	 


TOROUI

 	 


1.0



0.8

 	 
I	_0.6


works in reverse from the - Qn curve moving to the
QR curve.
  Harrington (1981) provides Table 42 as a procedure 
for the calculation of torque requirements for a horn 
rudder. As with the spade  rudder, the velocity of the
water onto the  rudder is assumed to be uniform  and



5

 
4

II)

u 3
:!:



 

\...


{,....,

 

-,0.4

E


6 2
equal to the velocity in the propeller race. In some

 



,lo....,


_, z
0


calculation procedures, only that portion of the rudder 
within the projected outline of the propeller disk is 
considered subject to uniform velocity in the propeller 
race, and parts of the rudder not within projection  of 
the propeller disk area are considered subject  to  a 
water velocity equal to the speed of the ship. This 
approach  may be logical and consistent  with other  ap­
proaches that have been taken, but parts of most horn


:z:,
a.
u.
0
II)
0
0:::.
j -1

 


" - ,

 


0.2 u.
II)
0:::.
0
:!:
w
::,
=u.2

 


rudders are outside a projection of the propeller and 
a correlation of results obtained with this procedure 
against trial data will not support the assumption.
Wind tunnel test data from Bowers (1959) for a series -5
of flapped control surfaces were adjusted to be appli­
cable to horn rudders. Faired into the relationship of -5
Fig. 241, these data permit a simple and straightfor­ IC


;,
\	\
\	..	/\
 


/\	/I	\I·\




 


; .,---,

 



\ -0.4

 
 
-0.6

-0.8


ward prediction for the hydrodynamic characteristics 
of that part of the rudder that trails the horn in cus­ 
tomary rudder configurations. Reviews of trial data 
suggest that over-capacity is a prudent objective.
  In a discussion of Harrington (1981), R. Taggart 
provided Fig. 242, which shows torques as developed


-7
::,
a:
I;: -a
w
.J
-9
0




10	20	30	40
TIME FROM EXECUTE IN SECONDS





.= 1.0
50


from ram pressures and strain gages on the rudder


Fig. 242 Trial data: DE 1040 Z-maneuvers at maximum approach speed


                         Table 42-Ahead Rudder Torque Calculations for a Typical Horn-type Rudder (Harrington, 1981) 
NOTE: These calculations are for the 20-deg rudder angle-of-attack position for Ship C, as defined by Fig. 240 and Table 41.
Propeller  thrust  =  326 Pe/V(l -   t)	T	482 500 lb
Speed  of  advance  = 1.69V(l -   w)	v	28.67  fps
Dynamic  pressure  =  0.994v2 + :		p	1800  psf
Rudder angle	a	20 deg

Lower Rudder Section:





220,000 kg
11.8 m/s
1.8 MPa


Taper ratio = X5/ (X1 + X2)
Mean chord  = 0.5 (X1 + X2 + X 5)
S weep ang le = tan _1 [0.25(X5 - X1 - X2) + X2 - X4]
.	Xa(      X2	a)


A	0.752 ...
c	17.38    ft
n	1.73 deg



7.2 m

"O
g


Aspect ratio  = c  2-	X  + X
1

Data uncorrected for taper ratio:


2 75


al	1.88


:n;;
mr­
CJ)


lift coefficient (see Figs.  240 and  241) 
drag coefficient (see Figs. 242 and 243) 
center of pressure (see Figs. 244 and 245)
2


CL1	0.901 ...
0.16
C   •1	0.219 ...


0-n
z


Lf
.


.
coe
ff. 
cor
rect
ion


= 
1.63A
- a,


0.73( 
_ a   )


t:,,
.C
L	0.032 ...



r
-
►;g
n
::i
::
=
i


Corrected drag coefficient"." CD 1 + t:,,.CD
CN 1 = CLi. cos a + CD1 s!n a


c	0.171 ...	m


CN = C½cos a+ C sm a
1


CM/42 = (0.25 - Cl\)CN1 - 2 t:,,.CL
Corrected center of pressure = 0.25 - 
Normal force = pcXaCN2



C
M
-
'
4
2
N
2


Hydrodynamic torque = 12F, (cCP;;2 - X 2 ; X 4
Bearing friction
_	daF	0.42Xa- X 12) 
-	µ,3  2	1	+	X + Xu


+ 2FX,  (0.42Xa-  X X12) [JL2d2(Xs + X9)
8	10	ll
Upper Rudder Section:


+ JJ,1d1X9]


1.4  X 106  in.-lb	16 X 
104 N,m


Mean chord = 0.5(X1 + X.J
Normal force coeff. (see Fig. 248)


13.605 ft
0.75    ...


5.6 m


 




  The test data and analytical procedures available for 
use in making astern torque predictions are very lim- 
ited. Accuracy is not as important in making astern 
torque predictions, because rudder balance is not in 
consideration. The entire astern torque curve has a 
negative sense and reaches a maximum  numerical 
value near the maximum (or stall) angle of attack.
  For this reason, use of the Joessel method is often 
advocated; it being further argued that the rudder 
sections have no aerodynamic shape in the astern di- 
rection and thus are, in effect, the same  as  the  flat 
plate used by Joessel in conducting his experiments.
  The velocity of the water flowing onto the rudder is 
considered to be uniform and equal to the astern speed 
of the ship. Considerable difficulty may be encountered 
in establishing an estimate of the astern  speed. A rule 
of thumb that may provide useful results is to assume 
that the power required astern is twice the power re- 
quired going ahead at the same speed, and that the 
power-RPM relationship is the same going ahead or 
astern. However, this approximation can be consid- 
erably in error for some types of ships. In some cases 
the astern power may be more than three times the 
ahead power required at the same ship speed.
  Horn rudders are divided into two sections for anal- 
ysis purposes: the upper section abaft  the  horn,  and 
the lower section below the horn. The results obtained 
for the two sections are then added.


396	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 





  Aspect-ratio considerations must again be dealt with 
in making astern predictions. In the case of spade 
rudders such as that for Ship A (see Fig. 232), the 
effective aspect ratio is taken to be twice the geometric 
aspect ratio at all rudder angles, for two reasons:  One 
is that at low angles of attack the  close proximity  of 
the adjoining hull structure would support that as- 
sumption. The other reason is that stall conditions are 
reached at a relatively low angle of attack in going 
astern, so that allowances for a reducing aspect ratio


with increasing rudder angles would not be of 
practical importance. For horn rudders, both the  
upper  and lower rudder sections are considered to 
have effective aspect ratios equal to twice the 
geometric aspect ratios at all rudder angles, owing to 
the sealing effect that each section provides the other 
and the effect of the horn on the lower section; no  
allowance is made  for the increasing gap between the 
horn and lower rudder section at larger rudder angles.
  Predictions for the frictional components of the as- 
tern rudder torque are made as outlined in Tables 40 
and 42, for spade and horn rudders, respectively,  for 
the ahead case.
  Figure 243 shows plots of astern torque predictions 
using    both  the   Joessel	method and cross-faired 
Whicker and Fuhlner (1958) test data, such as illus- 
trated by Figs. 233 through  238 for  the  ahead  case. 
As with the ahead predictions, estimates are made for 
the rudder being both displaced (frictional torque plus 
hydrodynamic torque) and restored (frictional torque 
minus hydrodynamic torque).
  The analysis of forces and torque should be done 
simultaneously with maneuverability analysis to attain 
dynamically correct results. Asinovsky (1985) has ar- 
gued that sufficient accuracy can be attained if the 
calculations cover the range of the angles of attack. 
Attempts at correlating the rudder angle with the an- 
gle of attack of the rudder do not all seem consistent 
with physical principles. When the value of the max- 
imum angle of attack is being determined, the increase 
of the stall angle behind the  hull  and propeller must 
be taken into account.  If the  results  of model tests  of 
a rudder under these conditions are not available to 
assist in evaluation, the value of the maximum angle 
of attack,  amax,     can be accepted as equal to 25 deg 
for aspect ratios in the interval of 1.0 to 2.0. The 
experi- mental hydrodynamic characteristics of the 
rudder ob- tained	under	open-
water	conditions	should	be 
extrapolated, and the value of the speed of the incom- 
ing wake taken as the ship speed on a straight course. 
Hagen (1972) showed that the unsteady lift coeffi-
cient and chordwise center-of-pressure location are 
functionally related to two simple rudder-shape pa- 
rameters. He proposed using these relationships in
estimating rudder loads for ships having generally 
similar rudder-hull configurations. Comparison of 
mea- sured rudder loads with values computed by  his 
method is shown in Fig. 244. Agreement is very good 
except for torque. Comparisons of rudder stock torque 
for several ships indicated that the estimated center- 
of-pressure locations are too far aft. Reliable correc- 
tions are thought possible by assuming the relation- 
ship of center-of-pressure location and the shape 
parameter P shown in Fig. 245, but shifting the curves 
based on measured full-scale rudder torques.
   17.9	EHects of Propulsion Plant and  Propellers.  The 
type of propulsion and propellers has various  effects 
on not only the basic acceleration responsiveness of


CONTROLLABILITY	397



the vessel but also on the directional stability char- 
acteristics.
  The power-to-displacement ratio (shp/ A) affects the 
responsiveness potential of the vessel. The type of 
power plant, propeller, and control systems can also 
have very important effects on controllability that 
should be reviewed during design. A closer examina- 
tion of the two power plants most commonly used in 
commercial ships reveals the following:
Astern propulsion characteristics relative to ahead, 
percent

TYPE OF POWER
PLANT
TORQUE
RPM
THRUST
Steam turbine

75
65
32
Diesel

100
100
32
The steam turbine power plant typically provides less 
than 50 percent thrust astern depending on turbine 
design. In addition, the reversing time on trials from 
ahead to astern averages 20 sec. In the case of the 
diesel power plant which can deliver 100percent torque 
astern, the non-controllable-pitch (non-CP) propeller 
can absorb only about 80 percent of ahead thrust and 
perhaps even less for modern highly skewed propel- 
lers, owing to strength limitations. The reversing time 
averages 20 sec if the engine is a reversible diesel and 
ship speed is not high. In the case of the nonreversible 
diesel, where separate engines drive the propeller 
through a hydraulic clutch, the reversing time aver- 
ages 35 to 40 sec.
Neither power plant is currently able to meet all the
needs for good slow-speed maneuverability unless cou- 
pled with CP propellers. CP propellers, however, have 
some drawbacks at slow speed because they tend to 
blanket the rudder and because they have a continuous 
paddle wheel effect. Tradeoffs must, therefore be ac- 
cepted. Further, the pitch distribution of the blades is 
designed for ahead and not  astern  operation.  The 
steam turbine-powered ship (without an auxiliary as- 
tern turbine) is able also to develop and maintain the 
"slow ahead" speed, but generally delivers less astern 
power for backing or stopping. The diesel power plant 
can deliver 80 percent astern thrust, but many diesels 
have difficulty maintaining the 4 to 5 knots slow-ahead 
speed (for extended periods) because of the tendency 
toward carbon buildup in the engine at low engine 
speed. The nonreversible diesel has the additional dis- 
advantage of the longer  reversing  time.  Attention 
must be given to the number of possible starts (for 
reversing the screw) in the case of the reversing diesel. 
During channel and harbor maneuvering, the pilot may 
need to stop and  start  the  engine  a number  of times 
to achieve controllability.
  Crash stopping performance is highly dependent on 
propeller diameter as well as on astern power. Since 
propeller diameter is generally already maximized to 
limiting hull geometry for efficiencypurposes, its size 
does not provide a useful variable in design for astern



operation. Increasing  the  machinery  responsiveness, 
or time rate of change of shaft rotational speed, is 
another possible way of improving performance. The 
CP propeller does improve stopping performance  
from 6 knots, but only by about 5 percent. That this 
per- formance is not greater is attributed to the adverse 
propeller pitch distribution for astern thrust. At 16 
knots, however, the CP propeller realizes the advan- 
tages of optimum mean pitch, maximum  available 
ahead shaft power, and quick thrust reversal.  Head 
reach is reduced by about 30 percent. Table 43 sum- 
marizes the chief propulsion changes that would re- 
duce stopping head reach for large tankers, and shows 
the relative gains to expect from each change for ap- 
proach speeds of 6 and 16 knots. The relative impor- 
tance is put in perspective by listing the reduced 
alternative approach speed that would be necessary to 
achieve the same effect, without any  propulsion 
change. Some of the alternative  propulsion  systems 
will have additive effects when combined. One 
example is the use of a ducted propeller combined 
with in- creased steam turbine  astern  power.  
Another  is  the CP propeller for improved high speed 
stopping, com- bined with the slow speed diesel for 
improved slow speed stopping, the latter done by 
reversing the engine and adjusting the propeller pitch 
to provide maximum




398	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


astern thrust. (The practical opportunities for confu- 
sion of terminology in direction of pitch, thrust, and 
engine and shaft rotation are rife.)
  The effect of doubling absorbed astern power as 
shown in Table 43 is based on the 191,000-dwtdesign 
and on results obtained within one project. As men- 
tioned previously, other arrangements have been eval- 
uated or their effects derived  from  results  presented 
by Goddard (1973).This latter work was aimed mainly 
at stopping from initially high speeds, but the calcu- 
lated time histories of speed and distance during de- 
celeration	permitted	adaptation	of lower speed 
segments to the larger 191,000-dwtvessel by correct- 
ing for changes in ship mass and  power.  The  other 
ship is a 100,000-dwt tanker having 28,000 shp avail- 
able at 85 rpm ahead. This adaptation of results ap- 
pears to be valid for slow speeds because mass and 
propulsion thrust are  then  the  predominant  factors 
that affect stopping (straight  path  assumed). But from 
a speed of 16 knots, hull resistance also becomes a 
major factor, and in conjunction with the two other 
factors, mass and thrust,  it  renders  difficult making 
the corrections needed to apply the results to other 
vessels. For this reason the use of results from God- 
dard (1973)to stopping from 16 knots is only roughly 
approximate.
Pilothouse control of main propulsion machinery
provides for rapid shaft reversal and optimum buildup 
of astern power. It also avoids the possibility of un- 
necessary time delay while the engine room watch 
answers unexpected emergency engine orders. The ef- 
fects of varying the engine acceleration response time 
were shown and discussed in Section 10.6 and 10.7. In 
other studies a prompt response time of 90 sec (to 
achieve ~o of ordered engine speed change) has been 
customary.
  Propeller effects desrve special attention. A propel- 
ler, or propellers, rotating behind a ship's hull to pro- 
vide thrust for a constant ahead speed influence both 
directly and indirectly the sway forces and yawing 
moments that act on the ship. The direct forces and 
moments are those produced by the propeller and not 
by the action of the propeller on the hull and rudder. 
The indirect influences of the propeller are those that 
result from the modification of the flow conditions 
around the stern of a ship induced by the propeller. 
These changes in flow speed and direction cause 
changes both in the rudder  forces  and  moments  and 
in the hull forces and moments as compared to the 
situation in the absence of propellers.
  The sway forces and yawing moments induced by  
the propeller influence the stability and control deriv- 
atives of almost all ships.  In  addition, on ships  with 
an odd number of propellers or with any number of 
unirotating propellers, the propellers introduce sub- 
stantial forces and moments even with v, SR, and raIl 
equal to zero. That is, even though such ships may 
possess controls-fixed, straight-line stability, they can-


CONTROLLABILITY	399




400	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE


directly  behind the  ship's  hull. On a single-screw mer-	arrangement in which the propeller exerts a much 
chants hip  form  with  a  relatively   small propeller  di-	smaller direct influence.
rectly  behind  the  hull,  the  straightening  influence of		Davidson developed the preceding arguments in an 
the  hull is substantial.  Thus,  even in a relatively tight	attempt to explain the great difference in tactical di- 
turn,  the average  direction of the inflow velocity in the	ameter between a destroyer that had two propellers 
horizontal  plane  to such  a propeller  is almost parallel	of large diameter relative to the hull and a cruiser  that 
to  the  propeller  shaft  line  in  spite  of  the large  geo-	had a hull almost geometrically similar to the destroy- 
metric drift  angle  at the propeller.  On the other hand,	er's but had four propellers of small diameter  relative 
on a ship with a very large  propeller or with propellers	to the hull. The sterns of these two ships are diagramed 
extending  well beyond the flow influenced by the hull,	in Fig. 247. Davidson concluded that the principal rea- 
the straightening   effect of the  hull on the inflow to the	son why the destroyer had a tactical diameter two ship 
propellers  is small.  The propellers  on such  a ship are	lengths larger than that of the cruiser at the same 
subjected  to  almost  the  full  geometric  drift angle at	Froude number was the difference in relative propeller 
the  propeller  and  exert,  directly,  a  highly favorable	sizes and layout. He reasoned that since the cruiser 
effect on  stability  and  a  highly  unfavorable effect on	propellers were much more within the flow volume 
turning  in contrast   to  the  single-screw merchants hip	straightened by the hull than were the destroyer pro-





CONTROLLABILITY	401



pellers, the deterimental influence of the  geometric 
drift angle at the propellers on turning was consid- 
erably alleviated by the cruiser hull but not by the 
destroyer hull.
  This direct influence of the propeller on stability and 
turning is important principally for certain military 
ships. The other direct influences of the propeller which 
primarily affect the magnitude  of the  neutral  angles, 
81 and /31> are important principally on single-screw 
ships since most multiple-screw ships have opposite- 
rotating propellers. The wake field of a single-screw 
ship has an upward component throughout the pro- 
peller disk. As a result, a blade in the three o'clock 
position (seen from aft) of a right-handed propeller 
develops a larger thrust than does a blade in the nine 
o'clock position. Therefore, the center of thrust of a 
propeller in this flow field is not at  the  shaft  center 
but is displaced to starboard. This direct influence of 
the propeller tends to cause the ship to turn to port.
  Another feature of the flow field of a single-screw 
ship is the high wake velocity near the twelve o'clock 
position on the propeller disk in contrast to the lesser
velocity near the six o'clock position. By analogy with 
Fig. 246, this velocity difference causes a blade of a 
right-handed propeller to receive a large lateral reac- 
tion force to port in the  twelve  o'clock position, while 
a blade in the six o'clock position receives a much 
smaller reaction force to starboard. This force differ- 
ence results in a net reaction force to port which tendli 
to cause the ship to turn to starboard. Thus, the two 
direct influences of the propeller discus!;iedin this and 
in the preceding paragraph produce opposing yawing 
moments on a single-screw ship. Shiba (1960) has 
shown that the yawing moment induced by the differ- 
ence in wake between the top and bottom of the pro- 
peller disk is much the stronger of the two effects and 
that free-running models of single-screw ships with 
right-handed propellers and with rudder removed turn 
strongly to starboard. However, as shown later in this 
section, this tendency is more than offset by other 
factors when the rudder is in place.
  The proximity of the propeller to the free surface 
with the concomitant possibility of aeration or the ac- 
tual emergence of the propeller also causes the pro- 
peller to produce lateral forces and yawing moments 
when v, r, and 8R all equal zero in addition to those 
described in the preceding. Most of  these  effects  are 
of particular importance in the starting, stopping, and 
backing of ships and are discussed in Section 10. Con- 
sideration in this section is limited to the constant- 
speed-ahead situation.
  The net direct effect of a right-handed propeller in 
applying a starboard turning moment to a single-screw 
ship is opposed by two indirect effects of the propeller, 
one on the rudder and the other on the hull. The latter 
effect is called the "Hovgaard effect" by Saunders 
(1957,Section 33.17),and arises from the stronger neg- 
ative pressure field around the starboard side of the





hull developed by a right-handed propeller  compared 
to the port side. This difference in pressure is also 
caused by the upward component of the flow into the 
propeller disk resulting in larger angles of  attack  on 
the propeller blades in the three o'clock position com- 
pard to the nine o'clock position. The difference in 
pres- sure at the stern of the ship results in a net force 
to starboard at the stern which produces a port yawing 
moment. Shiba's experiments, however, with free-run- 
ning models with their rudders removed, mentioned 
previously, tend to discount the strength of the Hov- 
gaard effect.
  Of greater importance, one of the indirect influences 
of a right-handed propeller on a rudder in its race 
causes a strong port yawing moment to be applied to 
the ship. In Saunders' words, "The greater tangential 
component of the velocity (induced by  the  propeller) 
in the upper part of the outflow jet, because of the 
increased wake and increased thrust of the propeller 
blades in that region, produces a greater (lateral) force 
acting to starboard when the rotating outflow jet im- 
pinges obliquely on the upper part of the rudder." This 
lateral force  acting  to  starboard  at  the  stern  applies 
a port yawing moment to the ship.
  The net effect of all the preceding direct and indirect 
influences of a single propeller rotating to produce 
thrust for uniform straight-ahead motion, on all single-


402	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE










e,;
.!,
..I
◄


5
0r
--
--
--
-
,-
--
--
-
.-
--
--
r-
--
--
-
r-
--
-.


i
n
c
l
u
d
e
 
t
h
e
 
l
o
n
g
i
t
u
d
i
n
a
l
 
h
y
d
r
o
s
t
a
t
i
c
 
t
r
i
m
m
i
n
g
 
m
o
m
e
n
t
 
M
l
J
 
w
h
i
c
h
 
i
n
 
c
o
e
f
f
i
c
i
e
n
t
 
f
o
r
m
 
i
s
 
h
i
g
h
l
y
 
s
p
e
e
d
-
d
e
p
e
n
­
 
d
e
n
t
 
T
h
i
s
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
s
h
i
p
 
i
s
  
m
o
r
e
  
t
h
o
r
o
u
g
h
l
y
  
d
i
s
c
u
s
s
e
d
 
b
y
 
A
r
e
n
t
z
e
n
 
a
n
d
 
M
a
n
d
e
l
 
(
1
9
6
0
)
.
  T
h
e
 
i
n
d
i
r
e
c
t
 
e
f
f
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
a
 
r
o
t
a
t
i
n
g
 
p
r
o
p
e
l
l
e
r
 
o
n
 
a
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
i
t
s
 
r
a
c
e
 
h
a
s
 
a
n
 
e
v
e
n
 
m
o
r
e
 
i
m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
 
o
n
 
s
t
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
 
a
n
d
 
t
u
r
n
i
n
g
 
t
h
a
n
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
m
o
m
e
n
t
s
 
d
u
e
 
t
o
 
a
s
y
m
m
e
t
r
y
.
 
F
i
g
.
 
2
4
8
 
s
h
o
w
s
 
a
n
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
o
f
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
r
e
e
 
r
u
d
d
e
r
s
 
o
f
 
d
i
f
f
e
r
i
n
g
 
a
s
p
e
c
t
 
r
a
t
i
o
s
 
t
e
s
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
o
p
e
n
 
w
a
t
e
r
 
a
s
 
w
e
l
l
 
a
s
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
r
a
c
e
 
o
f
 
a
 
p
r
o
p
e
l
l
e
r
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
i
r
l
e
a
d
i
n
g
 
e
d
g
e
s
 
a
 
d
i
s
t
a
n
c
e
 
o
f
 
0
.
2
 
p
r
o
p
e
l
l
e
r
 
d
i
a
m
e
t
e
r
 
a
b
a
f
t
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
p
e
l
l
e
r
.
 
A
s
 
n
o
t
e
d
 
i
n
 
t
h
e
 
f
i
g
u
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
n
o
r
m
a
l
 
f
o
r
c
e


j20t----+-----t-_.,... 	
j!
Cl)


-r----+	I


coefficients are 
nondimensionalized in the case 
of the rudder operating in the 
propeller race on the basis of 
Pn, the theoretical velocity 
existing immediately abaft the 
propeller. Fig. 248 displays 
two important influ­ ences of 
the propeller on the rudder:
  (a)	Rudder stall point is 
delayed until larger angles of 
attack are reached  than  in 
open water. This  effect is 
displayed in Fig. 249 which 
shows stall angle as a


I	2	3	4	5
EFFECTIVE ASPECT RATIO


6	function of aspect ratio. The very 
low stall  angle  of the freestream 
data of Shiba (1960) is due to the 
low


Fig. 249 Stall angle as a function of aspect ratio for rudders behind pro­ 
pellers as well as in free stream




screw merchant ships, is to tend to turn  the ship  to 
port if the propeller  is right-handed  and  to  starboard 
if the propeller is left-handed.
  The neutral angles 61 and /31 needed to maintain a 
straight course, that is, r = 0, under the action of  all  
the preceding direct and indirect effects of asymmetry 
arising  from  single-propeller  rotation   may  be deter­
mined from results of captive model tests such as those 
described in Section 8.3. The following equations apply:


Reynolds number of the experiments.
  (b)	The effect of stall is much less pronounced 
than in open water. Rather than exhibiting an abrupt 
de­ crease in normal force at stall, the rudder in the 
pro­ peller race shows only a slight discontinuity in 
the slope of the normal force curve at stall.
  Using a lift identity method, similar in principle to 
the thrust identity method described in Chapter VII, 
Vol. II to determine wake velocities in self-propulsion 
tests, the data reported by Shiba (1960) including 
those shown in Fig. 248 have been used to compute 
the ve­ locity increase, averaged over the entire area of 
the rudder, as a function of the propeller slip ratio. 
These results, in the form of the velocity ratio V,/V,  
are shown in Fig. 250. Within the band of values 
shown,


-	Yvvl  -	Ya61 = Y"
-	Nvvl  -   Na61 = N°


(175)


V ,/V is independent of rudder 
aspect ratio, rudder area, and 
rudder angle of attack. For all the 
variations of these three quantities, 
100 percent of the area of


where Y" = net sway force measured in a captive 
model test with the model restrained to move in a 
straight line, with 6R and v = 0, and with propeller 
operating at ship propulsion point; and
N° = corresponding net yawing moment
  Some of the components of Y" and N° may be isolated 
by conducting captive model tests with (a) propeller 
and rudder removed, (b) propeller rotating and rudder 
removed, and (c) propeller rotating and rudder set at 
zero. However, these tests are not necessary to de­ 
termine 61 and v1•
  For a submerged submarine, the neutral angles 
needed to maintain horizontal flight are highly speed­ 
dependent, whereas the values of v1 and 61 determined 
from Equation (175) are not highly speed-dependent. 
The speed-dependency in the vertical plane arises be­ 
cause the moment equation in the vertical plane must


all the rudders was located entirely within the pro­
peller race.
  The velocity increases due  to  propeller  slip shown 
in Fig. 250 are of great significance  to  the  stability 
and turning of ships because  the  magnitude  of  both 
(Yv )1 and Y6 increases directly with the velocity in­ 
crease as do (Y' v)1 and Y' 6 which are defined  in terms 
of the ship's velocity and not of the velocity of  flow 
past the rudder. The expressions for ( Y'v)1 and Y' 8 [(58) 
and 63a] will be modified as follows if a portion or all
of the rudder is located in the propeller race:
, -
& -

(176)
where p is the fraction of rudder area located  within 
the propeller race and V ,/V may be determined from 
Fig. 250.


CONTROLLABILITY	403



  The expression within the brackets of Equation (176) 
is plotted in the insert of Fig. 250 as a function of the 
fraction, p, and the apparent propeller slip ratio, S •
  Following the Figure and Equation (176) the effect 
of the propeller on the rudder influences the ship's 
derivatives as follows:
(a)	Increases negative magnitude of Y',. N',, and
N'a•
(b)	Increases  positive magnitude of Y',. and Y' 8•
(c)	Decreases  negative  magnitude  of N' v·
  The effect of the propeller race on N6• has been mea­ 
sured directly and reported by Eda and Crane (1965). 
Results are shown in Fig. 128, with the stern config­ 
uration shown in Fig. 54. Also shown in Fig. 128 are 
the slip ratios corresponding to the model and ship self-
propulsion points for the two models. The figure shows 
the magnitude of the scale effect in free-running model 
tests where the propeller must operate at the model self-
propulsion point rather than at the ship propulsion 
point. Since the same propeller  was  used on both 
models, and since the (Cs = 0.80) model has much the 
larger drag of the two, the slip ratio cor­ responding to 
its self-propulsion point is much larger than that of the 
(Cs = 0.60) model. This difference



accounts for the larger rudder force and moment de­ 
rivatives shown for the (Cs = 0.60) model. This dif­ 
ference accounts for the large rudder force and 
moment derivatives shown for the (Cs = 0.80) model. 
The propeller race also exerts an important influence 
on the straightening effect, E, for  rudders located in 
the race. Data presented by Surber  (1955) show that 
for a cruiser model with skeg and propeller locations 
as shown in Fig. 247, E averages about 50 percent of 
the geometric drift angle at a  distance 0.0125L abaft 
the inboard propeller disks. Interestingly, Eis reported 
to be essentially zero on the centerline of the ship, 
indicating that a single centerline rudder derives little 
benefit from straightening effect on a twin- or quad­
ruple-screw ship. However, this result conflicts with 
that of Eskigian (1956), who reported an e-value of 55 
percent of the geometric drift angle  on  the centerline 
of a twin-screw model with a skeg extending to Station
17. The results did indicate, however, that a centerline 
rudder on a multiple-screw ship with no centerline pro­ 
peller does not derive any change  in speed  of  flow as 
a result of the propeller race.
  A secondary indirect influence of the propeller is on 
the hull stability derivatives. An isolated experimental



















r.::,
I

-
i:::.:.:.:::.,2D
+




S =060 
SA=0.50 
SA=040 SA 
•0.30
SA•0.20





















0.5
p



























1.0




P = PROPELLER 
PITCH
n= PROPELLER 
REVOLUTIONS 
/UNIT  TIME V • 
SHIP VELOCITY
V,• FLOW VELOCITY 
AVERAGED OVER 
RUDDER
p= FRACTION OF 
RUDDER AREA 
LOCATED IN 
PROPELLER 
RACE
SA= PROPELLER 
APPARENT SLIP 
RATIO




FORE 
ANO AFT 
CLEARAN
CE 
BETWEE
N 
RUDDER 
ANO 
PROPELL
ER 
ABOUT 
0.20 
PROP. 
DIAMETE
R


2
.
2




2.0>

o
l
-
g
l
&
.
I
>
A
.
l
.
8
5
:
I
l
l
:
:
­
l
&
.
I
1
.
5
8
:
:
,
a
:
:
a
:
:
l
&
.
I


0
1
.
4
C
l
[
a
:
:
l
&
.
I

►
l
-
o
1
.
2
9
l
&
.
I
>







0	0.10	0.20



0.30	040	0.50
Pn-V
SA• -;:;,i- APPARENT SLIP RATIO



0.60


1.0
0.70


Fig. 250 Effect of propeller slip on velocity over rudder in propeller race (Shiba, 1960)


404	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



result shown in Fig. 9 of Eda and Crane (1965) shows 
that this influence is likely to:
(a)	Increase negative magnitude of Y' v•
(b)	Slightly increase positive magnitude of Y',..
(c)	Decrease negative magnitude of N' v•
(d)	Increae negative magnitude of N' r•
These are the same effects as those of a  fixed fin aft. 
To summarize, the following direct and indirect ef­ 
fects of a rotating propeller are all favorable to sta­
bility but unfavorable to turning:
  (a)	The direct influence of a rotating propeller due 
to a horizontal inflow angle,
  (b)	the indirect effect of a rotating propeller on a 
rudder in its race treated as a fixed fin, and
  (c)	the indirect effect of a rotating propeller on the 
hull derivatives.
  In contrast, the indirect effect of a propeller on a 
rudder treated as a movable control surface is favor­ 
able to turning.
   17.10	Use of Other Control Devices. While the hull­ 
propeller-rudder design approach provides the basic 
parameters available  to  the  designer  through  which 
to develop an adequately maneuverable ship, addi­ 
tional control devices and operational techniques may 
be applied to complement and provide a greater degree 
of maneuverability than would otherwise be attaina­ 
ble. Use of additional control devices may become a 
necessity in meeting special purposes that require con­ 
trol in a seaway at virtually zero ship speed. Cable 
layers, drill rigs, and  oceanographic  research  ships, 
for instance, often face this need. Other control d!:!vices 
are frequently installed because they provide maneu­ 
verability at slow speeds, especially in restricted har­ 
bor situations, where the vessel's hull-propeller-rudder 
capabilities are not as effective as at higher speeds in 
deeper water. The other devices can facilitate mooring 
and getting underway without use of tugs,  and  they 
can provide good maneuverability astern and good ma­ 
neuverability under unfavorable harbor and wind con­ 
ditions. The types and characteristics of a number of 
these devices, and general information on their limi­ 
tations and applications, are briefly outlined in this 
section, comprehensively by Wilson, et al (1979).
  In reviewing devices and operational techniques that 
are available to improve maneuvering and stopping 
ability, Card, et al (1979) made an extensive listing as 
shown in Table 44. They then subjectively rated each 
with regard to improvement in maneuverability, cost 
and effect on vessel design, practicality and reliability, 
and experience with the installation on large tankers. 
Under rudder augmentation, a number of the items 
listed in the table have already been covered in this 
chapter in some detail. Rudder area, angle, rate, lo­ 
cation, and number are basic to a design. The advan­ 
tages in using balanced rudders with fixed structure 
have also been addressed. Special rudder designs, how­ 
ever, provide higher efficiency of operations through 
hydrodynamic design or use of flow controlling plates.



 

Fig. 251 Schilling Rudder shown on o 1000 DWT coastal tanker



Fig. 252 The Pleuger active rudder in tandem abaft the main propeller


The Schilling rudder shown in Fig. 251 is a 
good ex­ ample of use of large horizontal 
plates to reduce flow losses and a special 
highly effective section with flared trailing 
edge. Installations on smaller vessels have 
shown high effectiveness.
  An active rudder as shown in Fig. 252 
has a sub­ merged motor and propeller as 
an integral part of the trailing edge of a 
standard rudder. It is particularly useful at 
low speeds where flow across the rudder 
from the main propeller is low.
The shutter rudder consists of three or more rud­
ders which are  mechanically  linked as  shown in Fig_
253. Although the maximum amount of the 
propeller race is utilized, this arrangement is 
most suitable for tugs and work  boats fitted 
with ducted  propellers.  For


CONTROLLABILITY	405
curves and their labels, Betz obtained twice the lift 
(comparing favorably against the curve of much higher 
aspect ratio from Reid) by simply adding end plates. 
As suggested by the nearly linear parts of the curves 
on Fig. 255, the  lift coefficient can be expressed ap­
proximately as:


CL= Mu/V- N
where M and N are constants. Thus the lift,
L = ½ pAV 2(Mu / V - N)
= ½ pA(MuV - NV2


(177)


(178)








Fig. 253 A Shutter Rudder installation on the 40-m tug Salimi




If, at the speeds of interest, lift is obtained, then MuV
>  NV 2 •  As the speed is reduced the numerical value
of V2 will decrease faster than that of V. Thus,
at low speed MuV > > NV 2 and L
                 = ½ pAMuV	approximately.
This last equation shows the advantage in using the 
rotating cylinder at low ship speeds. Rather than fall­ 
ing off as the square of forward speed, the side force 
of the rotating cylinder falls off only as the forward 
speed.
  Located along a leading edge of the rudder, the 
rotating cylinder can be used to control the boundary 
layer, energizing it with fluid of increased velocity. 
Rotated slowly, the cylinder permits larger angles of 
incidence before stall. The control available is a func­ 
tion of the rotational speed of the cylinder.
  The so-called Kitchen or clam shell rudders are 
similar to the thrust reversing devices on jet aircraft, 
where clam shell deflectors are moved to turn astern 
thrust from the jets (corresponding to propeller race 
on ships) to other directions. Proposals to use this 
device or the rotating-cylinder rudder introduce addi-



Fig. 254 Rotating cylinder rudder fitted to a radio-controlled maneuvering	 	
model



related reasons flanking rudders are best suited to 
restricted-draft craft with Kort Nozzles.
  The rotating cylinder rudder incorporates a ver­ 
tical rotatable cylinder on the forward edge of the 
rudder or before a flap as shown  in  Fig.  254. When 
the cylinder is rotated, circulation is generated  and  a 
lift force produced which is normal to the stream and 
the cylinder. The lift coefficient is a function primarily 
of the ratio u/V, where u is  the  peripheral  speed  of 
the cylinder. The lift also depends on the aspect  ratio  
of the cylinder and on its end conditions. Fig. 255, after 
Steele and Harding (1970), shows the lift coefficient 
rising steeply until the speed ratio approximates 3. 
Further increases in speed ratio have been found to 
cause little rise in the coefficient. As shown by the











•C
Fig. 255 Lift on rotating cylinders


406	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 

tional mechanical problems that must be addressed 
during design of the ship.
  The basics of propulsion augmentation and rudder 
augmentation have been covered in the previous sec- 
tion. These approaches increase maneuverability by 
increasing the flow across the rudder. The steerable 
nozzle is a special topic that has received detailed at- 
tention by Asinovsky (1985)and others. Fig. 256 shows
  

Aside from rudders, thrusting devices are the 
most popular control device. The tunnel thruster  
(Fig. 258) is most common and consists of a 
transverse duct with an impeller in the middle. 
The power offered by man- ufacturers in 
standard sizes ranges from 10 to several 
thousand hp.
The thrust   required  for  a given application of a ma-
neuvering device depends on the particular 
operating needs. For oceanographic or offshore 
drilling and min- ing vessels and other special-
purpose craft, the thrust requirement must be 
met if the mission is to succeed. Accordingly, 
within limits, the initial cost, added re- sistance 
at ahead speeds, and other factors are of sec- 
ondary importance to performance. The 
influence of economic factors is much greater, 
however, in consid- ering the use of 
maneuvering devices on merchant ships. An 
installation that would always eliminate the 
need for tugs or always meet  maneuvering  
needs  in the face of very high wind and current 
forces would probably be prohibitively 
expensive and space consum- ing. Therefore, 
maneuvering devices for merchant ves- sels are 
usually sized to achieve the  greatest  increase in 
maneuverability consistent with limits of 
economic, space, and resistance considerations 
as prescribed by
the ship owner.
  Gurovich et al. (1967) suggest that  statistical  
data be used in the first stages of design to 
estimate thrus- ter power needed. To determine 
needed thrust analyt- ically, they recommend 
using computations for solving specific 
problems when maneuvering is to be assured. 
The authors examine the following problems 
and pro- vide computational approaches for 
solving them:
  (a)	Determining thrust necessary to clear the 
ves- sel from a wall, such as a quay face, with 
wind pressing
the vessel toward it,
(b)	determining the angular velocity of a turn in
place at a given thrust of the thruster,


a steerable Kort nozzle installed on a 25,OOO-DWT
Great Lakes bulk carrier.
  The Voith Schneider vertical-axis  propeller  system 
is a special form of propulsion that provides extraor- 
dinary maneuverability for a vessel. Fig. 257 shows a 
typical unit. By controlling the angle of attack of the 
blades as they orbit, thrust can be applied in any di- 
rection. These units have proved very effective on tugs, 
workboats, and ferries.
The effect of drag augmentation devices has been
covered in Section 10.10, and operational techniques 
and methods as listed in Table 44 are available to the 
mariner for use as needed, provided, of  course,  that 
the necessary equipment is available and in working 
condition.


CONTROLLABILITY	407



Table 44-Devices and Operational Techniques to Improve 
the Maneuvering and Stopping Ability of Vessels
Rudder Augmentation	Propulsion/Rudder Augmentation
Increased Rudder	Steerable (Kort) Nozzle



the different types of devices can be segregated and a line 
of proportionality more readily defined for each. The factor 
of proportionality is the nondimensional parameter


  Area	Voith Scheider (Vertical Axis) 
Increased Rudder	Steerable Propeller
Angle


"C" = 2(T/ P)312 -JPl pA
where Tis thrust


(179)


Increased Rudder 
Rate
Twin Rudders 
Schilling Rudder 
Balanced Rudder with
Fixed Structure
(BRWFS)
Steerable BRWFS 
Active Rudder 
Shutter Rudder 
Rotating Cylinder
  Rudder 
Rotating Cylinder
  with Flap 
Kitchen Rudder 
Clam Shell Rudder 
Jet Flap (Fluidic) 
Bow Rudder
Propulsion 
Augmentation
Twin Screw (and 
Rudder)
Increased Astern 
Power
Controllable Pitch 
Propeller
Contra-Rotating 
Propeller


Thrusting Devices
Fixed (bow,stern) Thruster 
Trainable Thruster
Jet Engine Thruster 
Rockets
Drag Augmentation Devices 
Stern Anchor
Stern Flap (abaft screw) 
Twin (s_played) Rudders 
Brake FlaJ_>s
Bow Opemng Parachute


Pis power
A is disk area 
of the propeller
p is the mass 
density of 
water
The thruster devices 
discussed here are 
essentially dead-pull 
propulsion devices, 
but this is not to say 
that they are of no 
value when the ship 
is moving. Although 
their value changes 
and usually 
decreases 
dramatically as speed 
increases, 
maneuvering 
propulsion devices 
have some effect at 
ahead and astern 
speeds, partic­ ularly 
those ship speeds at 
which the rudder is 
least effective. A 
tunnel thruster at the 
bow is generally 
effective at ahead 
ship speeds as high 
as about 4 knots. At 
higher ship speeds, 
the flow around the 
hull distorts the 
thruster outflow, and 
it becomes 
practically inef­ 
fective (Chislett and 
Bjorheden, 1966). To 
indicate such 
changes in the bow 
thruster effectiveness 
with ship speed, 
turning trajectories in 
Fig. 260 were 
computed by Eda for 
a 250,000-dwt tanker 
with bow thruster, 
using captive model 
test data.
  A tunnel thruster 
at the stern, 
however, is in 
bound­ ary layer 
flow, and is 
effective at higher 
ship speeds. For a 
250-m (806-ft) 
Great Lakes ore 
carrier, the stern 
tunnel thruster was 
reported effective at 
ship speeds up to 10 
miles per hour (9.7 
knots) by Nielson 
and


Operational Techniques and Methods 
Slower ApIJroach Speed
Hard-over Turn 
Propeller Kick 
Rudder Cycling 
Tug Assistance:
Rudder Tug 
Brakini Tug 
Alongside Tug


Kendall (1974).
  Various limitations or other 
considerations concern the application 
of maneuvering devices. A few of the 
more important ones are mentioned 
here. Maneuvering devices should be 
located to achieve the greatest pos­ 
sible turning moment. This concern 
implies a position well forward or aft, 
but space and hydrodynamic con­ 
siderations often necessitate locating 
the device closer
to the center of  gravity. A bow thruster  
usually  has


Traditional Tug


(Card, et al 1979)


a slightly greater lever arm to the 
ship center of grav-





  (c) evaluating the possibility of mooring or moving 
broadside against the wind, and
  (cl) Determining the thrust necessary to keep aves­ 
sel moving on steady heading at low speed under the 
influence of wind.
  Unfortunately, full-scale trial results are  available 
for only a few maneuvering-device installations. Most 
of the available data on the thrust-producing capabil­ 
ities of these devices are based on design estimates. 
Further, these are  estimates  of  the  thrust  delivered  
at the propeller and do not take other important hy­ 
drodynamic effects into consideration. Nevertheless, 
the published data are of value. Fig. 259 shows a  plot 
of thrust to power ratio versus power loading or shaft 
horsepower to swept area ratio. In plots such as these,



 

Fig.  258     Bow thruster


408	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE




 


ity than has a stern thruster. This difference is sig- 
nificant for moments at virtually zero ship speed. If, 
however, the thruster is intended to operate at a few 
knots of ship speed, advantages may begin to favor a 
stern location. This shift is pointed out by Crane (1973). 
Essentially, hull forces come into action as a result of 
the low forward speed and  the  hull  drift  angle.  For 
the stern thruster these forces combine favorably,



whereas for the bow thruster there is some cancella- 
tion of effectiveness.
  Maneuvering devices require a degree of submer- 
gence to operate effectively. Often this requirement 
necessitates the use of two units side by side to avoid 
excessive vertical dimensions, as is the case with 
some oil tankers and passenger ships. For ships with 
wide ranges of draft variation,  the  minimum 
submergence is an important consideration.  The 
consensus  is that the centerline of the maneuvering 
device propeller should be at least one diameter 
below the  waterline and that it should be as low in 
the hull as space permits.
  For merchant vessels and certain other types, draft 
limitations may eliminate from consideration devices 
that extend below the hull baseline.
  The added resistance that may result from instal- 
lation of a maneuvering device will depend on the 
type and location of the device. For tunnel thrusters, 
model test experiments indicate that a carefully 
designed tun- nel entrance will keep the added 
resistance  to roughly 1 to 5 percent of the effective 
propulsion power, de- pending on the size of the ship. 
Actual experience with full-scale ships on the Great 
Lakes  has  revealed  that in most instances, the speed 
loss due to the added resistance of the tunnel openings 
is small and difficult to determine precisely, because 
of the presence  of other influencing factors.
  Very little information is available on the added re- 
sistance characteristics of other types of maneuvering 
devices such as active rudders and fixed right-angle 
drives. Presumably, a drag coefficientcan be assumed 
and the added resistance estimated.
  The selection of maneuvering propulsive devices 
re- quires consideration of many technical,  
operational, and economic factors, some of which 
have been cov- ered briefly here (see also Hawkins, 
1965; English, Rowe, and Bain, 1972; Stuntz and 
Taylor, 1964; En- glish, 1963; and Taniguchi, 1966). 
The hydrodynamic features of tunnel thrusters are 
covered by Beverdge (1972).A total ship performance 
analysis under thrus- ter control is shown by Wise and 
English  (1975) and by Eda (1975).


REFERENCES
  Abbott, I.H., and Von Doenhoff, A.E., Theory of 
Wing Sections, Dover Publications, Inc., 1958.
  Abkowitz, M.A., Ashe, G.M.,and Fortson, R.M., 
"In- ternational Effects on Ships Operating in 
Proximity in Deep and Shallow Water," Proceedings 
of the Elev- enth Symposium on Naval 
Hydrodynamics, ONR Pub- lication, 1970.
  Abkowitz, M.A., "Lectures on Ship Hydrodynam- 
ics-Steering and Maneuverability," Hydro-Og Aero- 
dynamisk Laboratorium, Report Hy-5, Lyngby, 
Denmark, 1964, pp. 113.
Abkowitz, M.A., "Measurement of Hydrodynamic


CONTROLLABILITY	409


Characteristics from Ship Maneuvering Trials by Sys-  Large  Ships," Shipping  World and  Shipbuilder,  No- 
terns Identification," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 88. vember 1968.
  Alman, P.R., Bertsche,  W.R,  Boylston, J.W., Card,  Bertsche,  W.R., Smith, M.W., Marino, K.L., Cooper,  
J.C., Crane Jr., J.L., Eda,  H., Keith, V.F., Landsburg,  RB.,  "Draft  SRA/RA  Systems  Design  Manual,  Re- 
A.C., McCallum, LR., Miller, Jr., E.R, and Taplin, A., stricted Waterways," Eclectech Associates, Inc., for 
"Design and Verification for Adequate Ship Maneu- U.S. Coast Guard, 1982.
verability,  etc."  SNAME Transactions,  Vo1.91.		Beveridge, J.L., "Design and Performance of Bow 
Ames, M.B. and Sears,  RL,  "Determination  of Con-	Thrusters," Marine Technology, October 1972.
trol-Surface   Characteristics    form NACA Plain-Flap	Bhattacharyya,   R,  Dynamics   of  Marine  Vehicles,
and Tab Data," NACA Report 721, National Advisory John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1978, Pg.  408. 
Committee  for Aeronautics,  1940.	Bindel, S.G.;'"Experiments  on Ship Maneuverability
  Ankudinov, V.R., Miller, E.R., Alman, P.R,  Jacob-  in Canals  as  Carried  Out  in the  Paris  Model Basin," 
sen, B.K. and Conrad, RE., "Ship Maneuverability As- First Symposium on Ship Maneuverability, DTRC Re- 
sessment in Ship Design-Simulation Concept," port 1461.
Proceedings, International Conference on Ship Ma- Bindel, S.G., "Turning Characteristic Coefficients 
neuverability Prediction and Achievement, RINA, Lon- for a Cargo Ship and Destroyer," First Symposium on 
don, April/May  1987.	Ship Maneuverability, DTRC Report 1461.
  Aukudinov,  V.K., and Jakobson,  B.K., "Mathemat-  Bishop,  R.,  Burcher,  R.K.,  and  Price,  W.G.,  "The  
ical Modeling for Naval Ship Handling Simulators," Determination of Ship Maneuvering Characteristics 
Proceedings MARSIM '87 Conference on Marine Sim- from Model Tests," Trans. RINA 1975.
ulation,  Trondheim, Norway,  1987.		Bottomley, G.H., "Maneuvering of Single-Screw 
Aranow,  P.L,  "Maneuvering  Response Supplemen-	Ships," Institute of Civil Engineers, 1935.
tal  Experiments  (Collier  and  Containerships),"  Na-  Bowers,  A.A.,  "Wind  Tunnel  Investigation  of  the tional 
Maritime Research Center, New York, CAORF Characteristics of a Flapped Control Surface Mounted Technical 
Report 42-8218-01,1983.	on a Simulated Submarine Hull," University of Mary-
Arentzen,  E.S., and Mandel, P., "Naval Architecture	land Report 259, June 1959.
Aspects   of   Submarine   Design."  SNAME  Transac-	Boylston, J.W., "Is  Port  Study ModelTesting Really
tions,  Vol. 68.	Worthwhile?" Marine Technology, January 1974. 
Asinovsky,   V.,  "Consideratiol) of  Maneuverability		Brard,  R,  "Essais  en modele de canal Ie modeles de
Characteristics in  the  Rudder  Design  Process,"  Navires  autopropulses,"  Assn. Technique Maritime et 
SNAME Los Angeles Section, March 1985, pp. 43. Aeronautique, 1950.
  Asinovsky, V., "Simplified Approaches for the Eval- Brard, R, "Maneuvering  of  Ships  in  Deep  Water, 
uation of Maneuverability of Ships," Naval Engineers Shallow Water and in Canals," SNAME,  Transac- 
Journal,   March 1986.	tions, Vol. 59.
  Asinovsky,  V., Landsburg,  A.C., and  Hagen,  G.R,  Breslin,  J.P.,  and  Landweber,   L.,  "A  Manual  for 
"Ship Maneuverability Analysis Using the Differential Calculation of Inception of Cavitation on Two- and 
Approach," Proceedings, International Conference on Three-Dimensional Forms," SNAME Bulletin 1-21,Oc- 
Ship Maneuverability Prediction and Achievement, tober 1961.
RINA  London, April/May  1987.			Brink, A.W., and Stuurman, A.M., "Automatic and 
Asinovsky,  V.,  "Review  and  Analysis  of Ship Ma-	Manual Control of the Tripartite Minehunter in the 
neuverability    Criteria,"   Naval  Engineers   Journal,		Hover  and Trackkeeping  Modes-A	Preliminary De- 
May 1989.		sign  Study,"  International	Shipbuilding	Progress,
Atkins,  D.,  and  Gaffney,  M., "Relationship of Ship	Vol. 26, No. 300, 1979.
Size to Transit Performance in a Channel Section Con- Burcher, RK.,  "Developments  in Ship Maneuvera- 
taining Cross Current," Fourth CAORF Symposium, bility," Trans. RINA, 1972.
U.S. Maritime Administration,  Kings  Point, NY, 1980.			Burcher, RK., "Studies into the Validity of Quasi 
Attwood,  E.L., Pengelly,  H.S., and  Sims, A.J., The-	Steady Prediction Techniques," Proceedings, Vol. 2, 
oretical  Naval  Architecture,	Longmans,  Green and		International Towing Tank Conference, 1975, pp. 404-
Co., London, 1953.	407.
  Aucher, M.,  "Unconventional  Maneuvering  De-  Cahill, J.F.,  "Summary  of Section Data  on Trailing-  
vices,"  The  13th ITI'C Proceedings,  1972.	Edge High-List Devices," NACA Report 938, National
Baker,  G.S.,  "Steering   of  Ships  in Shallow Water	Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 1949.
and  Canals,"  Trans. INA, 1924.			Card, J.C., Cojeen, H.P., Spencer, J.S., and Harmon, 
Barr,  RA.,   Miller,  E.R,   Ankudinov,  V., Lee, F.C.	J.P., "Report to the President on an Evaluation of 
"Technical Basis  for  Maneuvering Performance  Stan-		Devices and Techniques to Improve Maneuvering and 
dards,"  U.S. Coast Guard Report  CG-M-8-81N,  TIS AD		 Stopping Abilities of Large Tank Vessels,"  U.S. Coast
A 114471, Dec. 1981.	Guard, Washington, DC, Sept. 1979.
Bech,  M., "The  Reversed  Spiral Test  as Applied to	Chase, H.J., and Ad Hoc Panel Members, "Guide to


410	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

the  Selection  of  Backing  Power,"  T. and R  Bulletin		Channels," Hydraulic Design of Deep-Draft Naviga- 
No. 3-5, SNAME, 1957.		tion Channels, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Water- 
Chislett, M.S., and Bjorheden, 0., "Influence  of Ship	ways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, Miss., 1983.
Speed on the Effectiveness of Lateral Thruster Unit," Dand, I.W., "On  Modular  Maneuvering  Models," Hydro-
og Aerodynamisk Laboratorium, Lyngby, Den- Proceedings, International Conference  on  Ship  Ma- mark,  
Report Hy-8, 1966.	neuverability Prediction and Achievement, RINA Lon-
Chislet,  M.S., and  Strom-Tejsen, J., "Planar  Motion	don, April/May 1987.
Mechanism Tests and Full Scale Steering Maneuvering		Dand, I.W., "Some Aspects of Maneuvering in Col- 
Predictions   for  a  Mariner   Class Vessel,"  Hydro-Og	lision Situations in Shallow Water," Proceedings of the 
Aerodynamisk  Laboratorium,  Report  HyA 6, Lyngby,	Tenth Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, ONR 
Denmark, April 1965.	Publication ACR-204, 1974.
  Clarke,  D., "Considerations  of Shiphandling in Hull		Dand, LW., and Hood, D.B., "Maneuvering Exper- 
Design," Nautical   Institute	Conference, 1977.	iments Using Two Geosims of the Esso Osaka," Na-
  Clarke, D., "Assessment  of Maneuvering  Perform-  tional  Maritime  Institute,  Feltham,  England,  May 
ance," Ship Maneuverability Prediction and 1983.
Achievement,    RINA, London, 1989.		Davidson, K.S.M., "Concerning the Differences in 
Clarke,  D.,  Gedling, P.,  and  Hine,  G., "The Appli-	Minimum Turning Diameters of Cruisers and Destroy-
cation  of  Maneuvering  Criteria  in Hull Design Using	ers," E'IT Technical Memo 73, July 1945.
Linear  Theory,  "  Trans. RINA, 1982.		Davidson, K.S.M., "On the Turning and Steering of 
Clarke,  D., Patterson,   D.R,  and  Wooderson, RK.,	Ships," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 52.
"Maneuvering   Trials  with  the   193,000 Tonne Dead-		Davidson, K.S.M, and Schiff, L., "Turning and 
weight  Tanker  Esso  Bernicia,"   Trans. RINA, 1973.	Course Keeping Qualities of Ships," SNAME Trans-
Clarke,  D.,  "A  Two-Dimensional Strip Method for	actions, Vol. 54.
Surface  Ship Hull Derivatives:  Comparison of Theory		Davidson Lab, "Free-Running Tests," unpublished 
with   Experiments   on  a  Segmented Tanker  Model,"	report, 1965.
Journal	of  Mechanical  Engineering	Science,  Pro-		"Deep Draft Navigation Project Hydraulic Design- 
ceedings  of an  International   Symposium on Direction	DRAFT," Engineer Manual EM 1110-2,Office of the 
Stability  and  Control of Bodies Moving in Water, Vol.	Chief of Engineers Corps of Engineers, Dept.  of the 
14, No.7,  J972.		Army, 1982.
  Clarke, D. and Wellman, F., "The Stopping of Large Demenet, P.F., Lewis, G., Mikelis, N.E., Hollocou, 
Tankers and Feasibility of Using Auxiliary Braking Y., "Results from Maneuverability Tests with Models 
Devices,"  Trans.  RINA,  Vol. 113, 1971.	at the Port Revel Centre and Some Comparisons with
  "Code  of  Recommended Standards  for the Preven-	Mathematical   Predictions,"	Ship	Maneuverability 
tion of Pollution in Terminal Systems," Canadian Coast	Prediction and Achievement, RINA, London, April- 
Guard, February  1977.	May, 1987.
  Cojeen,  H.P.,  Landsburg,  A.C.,  and  MacFarlane,  Detchmendy, D.M. and  Sridhar,  R  "Segmential  Es- 
A.A., "One Approach to the Development and Achieve- timation of States and Parameters in Noisy Nonlinear 
ment of Maneuvering Standards," Proceedings, Inter-  Filtering  Theory,"  Journal  of  Basic  Engineering, 
national Conference on Ship Maneuverability ASME, June 1966.
Prediction   and   Achievement,  RINA London, April/		DeSantis, R and Russo, M., "Rolling Experiments" 
May 1987.	SNAME Transactions, Vol. 44, 1936.
  Constantine, T., "On  the  Movement of Ships in Re-  "Design  Manual-Harbor  and  Coastal  Facilities," 
stricted  Waterways,"  Journal  of  Fluid  Mechanics,  U.S. Navy, NAVDOCKS DM-26,Government Printing 
Vol. 9, October 1960.	Office Publication D209/14:26.
  Crane,  Jr.,  C.L.,  "Maneuvering  Safety  of  Large  DeVerdiere,  G.,  and  Andren,  V.,  "Influence  des 
Tankers: Stopping, Turning, and Speed Selection," formes de navires et de gouvernails  sur  la navigation 
SNAME  Transactions,  Vol. 81.	en canal," Assn. Technique Maritime et Aeronautique,
Crane,  C.L.,  "Maneuvering  Trials  of 278,000 DWT	1951, p. 491.
Tanker  in Shallow and Deep Waters," SNAME Trans-	DeVris,   W.A.,   "Determination    of Hydrodynamic
actions,  Vol. 87.	Coefficients by Force Excitation on Free  Sailing Ships,
  Crane, Jr.,  C.L., "Response  of  Slowly Moving Ship  MARSIM  84, Proceedings,  of the  Third  International 
to Propeller and Rudder Actions," First Ship Control Conference on Marine Simulation, Rotterdam, The 
Symposium, Annapolis, MD, 1966 (and Davidson Lab- Netherlands, June, 1984.
oratory  Report  No. 1169, 1966).		Dieudonne, J., "Collected French Papers on Stability 
Crane,  C.L., "State   of  the  Art  on  How to Include	of Route of Ships at Sea, 1949-1950,"DTRC Transla-
Human   Control  into  the   Method of  Investigation,"	tion 246, 1953.
General  Lecture  No.3,   Symposium on  Aspect of Na-		"Draft Guidelines on Navigation Bridge Visibility," 
vigability,  Delft,  Holland, April 1978.	International Maritime Organization, MSC/Circ. 403,
Crane,  C.L.,  "Navigation   in  Ship Maneuvering  in	June, 1985.


CONTROLLABILITY	411

  Drager H., "Cause Relationship of Collisions and Eskigian, N.M., "A Model Study of the Fluid Flow 
Groundings,"   Proceedings   First   International    at  the  Rudder  Stock of a  Surface  Ship,"  ETT Report 
Bridge Design and Operations Forum, National Mar- 600, September 1956.
itime  Research   Center,  Kings  Point,  New York, Oc-			Fediaevsky, K.K., and Sobolev, G.V., Control and 
tober  1979, pp. 26-36.		Stability in Ship Design, U.S. Department of Com- 
Draper,	N.R.,   Smith,   H.,   "Selecting   the   'Best',	merce Translation, Washington, DC, 1964, pp. 423.
Regression  Equation,"   Chapter  6 of Applied  Regres-	Franklin, G.F., Powel, J.D., and Emami-Naeini, A.,
sion  Analysis,   Wiley, New York, 1966.	Feedback   Control   of  Dynamic	Systems, Addison- 
Ducane,  P., and Goodrich, G.J., "The Following Sea,	Wesley, 1986.
Broaching  and  Surging,"   Trans. RINA, 1962.			"Free-Turning Test Results of Series 60 Models," 
Eda,  H.,  "Applications  of  Digital Simulation Anal-	Unpublished Data, Davidson Laboratory, June 1965. ysis  
to  Ship  Control-Dynamic  Positioning Control of			Fujino, M., "Experimental Studies of Ship Maneu- 
Drilling Ships," Proceedings,  Fourth  Ship Control Sys-		verability  in Restricted Waters,"  International	Ship- 
terns  Symposium,  Royal  Netherlands  Naval  College,		building Progress, Part I, Vol. 15, No. 168, 1968 and
Rotterdam,   Netherlands, Vol. 4.	Part II, Vol. 17, No. 186, 1970.
  Eda,  H., "Directional  Stability and Control of Ships      Fujino, M., Maneuverability    in  Restricted   Waters: 
in  Restricted  Channels"  SNAME  Transactions,  Vol.  State  of  the  Art,   University  of  Michigan,  No.  184, 
79.	August 1976, pp. 141.
  Eda,  H., "Directional  Stability and Control  of Ships			Fujino, M. and Fukasawa, T., Ishiguro, T., and Wa- 
in Waves,"  Journal   of Ship   Research, SNAME, Sep-	tanabe, K., "Rudder Force and Maneuvering Motions 
tember  1972.		in Shallow Water,"Proceedings, International Confer- 
Eda,   H.,   "Dynamic   Behavior  of Tankers  During	ence on Ship Maneuverability Prediction and Achieve-
Two-Way Traffic  in  Channels," Marine  Technology,	ment, RIMA, London, April/May 1987.
Vol. 10, July  1973.		Fuwa, T., "Hydrodynamic Force Acting on Ship in 
Eda,  H.,  "Dynamic  Positioning  Control of Drilling	Oblique Towing," Journal of the Society of Naval
Ships," Proceedings,  The Fourth Ship Control Systems	Architects of Japan, Vol. 134, 1973.
Symposium, Rotterdam,  1975.		Garthune, R.L., et aI, "The Performance of Model 
Eda,  H.,  "Effect   of  Rudder  Rate on Maneuvering	Ships in Restricted Channels in Relation to the Design
Performance  of a Large  Tanker,"  SNAME T & R Re-	of a Ship Canal," DTRC Report 601, August  1946. 
port R-22, 1976.		Gertler,  M., and Bradley, F.D., "The Effects  of Var-
  Eda, H., Falls, R., Walden, D., "Ship Maneuvering ious Types of Rudders on the Turning  Characteristics 
Safety  Studies,"  SNAME Transactions,yol.     87.	of  a  Destroyer   Model,"  DTRC Restricted   Report R-
Eda,   H.,   "Maneuvering   Characteristics  of  Large	270, 1948.
Tankers,"  The Million  Ton Carrier,  Super Ocean Car-  Gertler, M., and Gover, S.C., "Handling  Quality Cri-  
rier Conference, San Pedro, California, 1974, pp. 379- teria for Surface Ships," Chesapeake Section, SNAME, 
400.	1959.
  Eda,  H.,  "Notes  on  Ship Controllability,"  SNAME		Gertler, M., "Steering and Maneuvering; the State 
Bulletin  No. 1-41, April 1983.	of  the   Art,"	14th ATTC Conference, September
Eda,   H.,   "Shiphandling   Simulation Study  During	1965.
Preliminary  Ship Design,"  Proceedings, Fifth CAORF		Gertler, M., "The DTMB Planar Motion Mechanism 
Symposium, Kings  Point,  N.Y., May 1983.	System," Symposium of Towing Tank Facilities, Za-
Eda,  H., "Ship  Control Bibliography," SNAME Bul-	greb, Yugoslavia, September 1959.
letin No. 1-40, April 1982, pp. 185.		Giddings, A.J. and Louis, W.L., "Overcoming Sub- 
Eda,  H., "The Mariner  Model Cooperative Test Pro-	marine Control Surface Jams and Flooding Casual-
gram-Correlations	and Applications," Proceedings,	ties," Naval  Engineers  Journal,  December  1966. 
Vol. 2, International   Towing Tank Conference, 1975.		Glansdorp,  C.C., "Research  on Steering, Maneuver-
  Eda, H., "Tracking an Oil Tanker from New York  ing and Controllability of Surface  Shps-Part  I: Ships 
Harbor Narrows to Arthur Kill," SNAME Transac-  Maneuvering  Trials  and  Some New Concepts in Ship  
tions,  Vol. 85.	Controllability," Netherlands Maritime Institute, Rot-
Eda,  Haruzo,  and  Crane, Jr.,  C.L., "Steering  Char-	terdam, 1977.
acteristics   of  Ships  in  Calm  Water   and in Waves,"		Glansdorp, C.C., "Research on Steering, Maneuver- 
SNAME  Transactions,  Vol. 73.	ing   and   Controllability   of Surface  Ships-Part	I,"
English,   J.W.,  Rowe,  S.J.,  and  Bain, D.C., "Some	SNAME Chesapeake Section, 1977.
Maneuvering Devices for Use at Zero and  Low Ship  Glansdorp,  C.C., "Maneuvering  Trials-An  Evalua- 
Speed," National Physical Laboratory Report No. 163, tion of Existing Codes, Trials, and Measuring  Tech-  
1972.	niques and Recommendations for Future Performance
  English, J.W., "The Design and Performance of Lat- of Maneuvering Trials" Report No. 11, Navigation Re- 
eral Thrust Units for Ships," Royal Institute of Naval search Center, Netherlands Maritime Institute, Rot- 
Architects, January  1963.	terdam, 1976, pp. 52.


412	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

  Goddard,  T.A.,  "Maneuvering   of Large  Tankers,"		Hewins, E.F., Chase, H.J., and Ruiz, A.L., "The 
SNAME Transactions,   1972.	Backing Power of Geared-Turbine-Driven Vessels,"
Goodman,	A.,	"Experimental	Techniques	and	SNAME Transactions, Vol. 58.
Methods  of  Analysis  Used  in  Submerged  Body Re-		Hirano, M., "A Practical Calculation Method of Ship 
search,"   Third  Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics,	Maneuvering Motion at Initial Design Stage," Journal 
Scheveningen,  The  Netherlands, September 1960.	of Society of Naval Architects of Japan, Vol. 147,June
Goodman,  A.,  Gertler,  M., and  Kohl, R., "Experi-	1980.
mental Techniques and Methods of Analysis Used at Hirano, M., Takashina, N., and Moriya, S., "A Prac- 
Hydronautics for Surface-Ship Maneuvering Predic- tical Prediction Method of Ship Maneuvering  Motions 
tions," Eleventh ONR Symposium on Naval Hydro- and Its Application," Proceedings, International Con- 
dynamics, London, 1976.	ference on Ship Maneuverability Prediction and
Goodman, T.R.,  "System  Identification and Predic-	Achievement, RINA London, April/May 1987.
tion-An	Algorithm  Using a Newtonian Iteration Pro-			Hirano, M.,Takashina, J., Moriya, S. and Nakamusa, 
cedure,"   Quarterly  of Applied Math.,  Vol. XXIV, No.		Y., "An Experimental Study  on Maneuvering Hydro- 
3, Oct. 1966.		dynamic Forces in Shallow Water," Trans. of the 
Goodrich, G.J., and Mollard, A.F., "Wind Tunnel In-	West-Japan Society of Naval Architect, No. 69 (1985). 
vestigations    of  Semi-Balanced Ship  Skeg-Rudders,"			Hirano, M., and Takashina, J., "A Calculation of Ship 
Trans.  RINA,  1979, pp. 285-307.		Turning Motion Taking Coupling Effect due to Heel 
Graff,  W., et aI, "Some Extensions  of D.W. Taylor's	into Consideration," Trans., Society of Naval Archi-
Standard  Series,"  SNAME Transactions,   Vol. 72.	tects of West Japan, No. 59, 1980.
  Grim, 0., "The Ship in a Following Sea," DTRC Hirano, M., and Takashina, J., "Estimation of Linear 
Translation. No. 313, by  E.N.  Labouvie,  February  Derivatives  in Shallow Water,"  International  Towing 
1965.	Tank Conference Proceedings, Session on Maneuver-
Grose, Vernon L., "Converting Health Hazard Con- ability, 1987.
trol from  Moralism  to  Management,"  Professional  Hooft, J.P.,  and Paymans,  P.J.,  "Four  Years  Oper-  
Safety, American Society of Safety Engineers, March ation Experience  with  the  Ship  Control  Simulator," 
1980..	Proceedings, First Ship Technology and Research
Gurovich, A.N., Rodionob,A.A., Asinovsky, V.I., and	(STAR) Symposium, SNAME, August 1975.
Grinberg,  D.A., Hull  Equipment	Handbook for  De-		Hooft, J.P., and Pieffers, J.B.M., "Maneuverability 
signers  and  Builders,   Chapter  I "Steering Gear," Su-	of Frigates in Waves," Chesapeake Section Paper, So- 
dostroyeniye,  (NAVSEA Translation  No. 2021), 1967.	ciety of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, New
Hadler,  J.B.,  and  Cheng,  H.M., "Analysis of Wake	York, October, 1987.
Data of Single and Twin-Screw Ships," SNAME Trans-	Hoyt,   E.D.   and   Imlay,   R.F.,   "The   Influence of
actions,  Vol. 73.	Metacentric Stability on the Dynamic Longitudinal Sta-
  Hagen,   Grant   R.,  "A  Catalog  of Existing  Mathe-	bility of a Submarine," DTRC Report C-158, October 
matical  Models  for  Maneuvering," Twentieth  Ameri-	1948.
can  Towing Tank  Conference, August,  1983.			Hwang,    W.Y.,  "Hydrodynamic   Interactions	Be- 
Hagen,  Grant  R., "A  Contribution  to the Hydrody-	tween Ships in Shallow Waters," Masters Thesis, Mas- 
namic Design  of Rudders,"  Trans.  Third Ship Control		sachusetts	Institute	of	Technology,	September
Systems    Symposium,   Ministry   of  Defence,   Bath,	1976.
United Kingdom, 1972.				Hwang, W.Y., "Application of System Identification 
Hall,  Jr.,   W.E., "System  Identification-An	Over-	to Ship Maneuvering," Ph.D. Thesis, Department of 
view,"  Naval  Research  Reviews,  Arlington, Va., Vol.		Ocean Engineering, M.LT., Cambridge, Mass., 1980. 
XXX, No.4,  April 1977.				Iijima, Y., and Honda, K., "On a Lane Width of a 
Harper,  J.J.,  and  Simitses,  G.J., "Effect  of a Simu-	Harbor Passage," Doctoral Thesis, Kobe University
lated   Submarine   Hull  on  the  Characteristics of All-	of Mercantile Marine, 1977.
Movable Control Surfaces,"  Georgia Institute  of Tech-		Inoue, S., Hirano, M., Kijima, K., and Takashina, J.• 
nology Report  439, August  1959.	"A Practical Calculation Method of Ship Maneuvering
  Harrington,	R.L.,   "Rudder	Torque   Prediction,"	Motion," International	Shipbuilding	Progress, Rotr 
SNAME Transactions,   1981.		terdam, Netherlands, Vol. 28, No. 325, September
Hawkins,  S., Taggart,  R., and Hoyt, E.D., "The Use	1981.
of   Maneuvering    Propulsion   Devices  on  Merchant		Inoue, S., Hirano, M., and Kijima, K., "Hydrody- 
Ships," Report  RT-8518for the Office of R&D Division	namic  Derivatives  on  Ship  Maneuvering,"  Inte".". 
of Power Research, U.S. Maritime Administration, Jan-	tional	Shipbuilding	Progress,	Rotterdam, 
uary  1965.	Netherlands, Vol. 28, No. 321, May 1981.
  Hawkins,   S.,  "The  Selection  of Maneuvering  De-		Inoue, S., and Kijima, K., "The Hydrodynamic De- 
vices,"  Chesapeake  Section SNAME, September 1965.	rivatives of Ship Manueverability in Trimmed Con~
  Henschke,   W.,  Schiffbautechnisches	Handbuch	tion," 15th IITC Proceedings, Part 2, 1978. 
(Shipbuilders  Handbook),  2nd ed.,  VEB Verlag Teck-		Inoue, S., Kijima, K., Tanaka, S., and Eto, T., "So. 
nik,  Vol. 1, 1957.		ulation  of  Stopping  Maneuvers  of  Ship in Restricted


CONTROLLABILITY	413

Waters,"  Journal,  Society of Naval Architects of West	Ship Maneuverability Prediction and Achievement, 
Japan,  No. 60, 1980.	RINA, London, April/May, 1987.
  Inoue,  S.,  "On  the  Point  in  Vertical  Direction  on  Koning,  Resistance,  Propulsion  and  Steering   of 
which  Lateral  Force  Acts,"  (In Japanese),  Technical  Ships,  Technical  Publishing  Company,   Holland, 
Report Sp 82, West Japan Society of Naval Architects, 1948.
1979.	'		Kose, K., "On aNew Mathematical Model of Ma- 
ITTC "Ship  Maneuvering  Committee Report," Pro-	neuvering Motions of a Ship and its Applications,"
ceedings,  16th International  Towing Tank Conference,	International	Shipbuilding	Progress, Rotterdam, 
1981.	Netherlands, Vol. 29, No. 336, August 1982.
  ITTC  Report  of  the  Maneuverability   Committee,   Koseki,   Yamonouchi,   Matsuoka,   and   Yamazaki, 
17th International  Towing  Tank  Conference,  Gote-  "Some Model Experiments  on Shallow Water  Effects 
borg,  1984.	Upon Turning Ability," Journal Society of Naval Ar-
Jacobs,  W.R.,  "Estimation   of Stability  Derivatives	chitects of Japan, Vol. 117, June 1965.
and  Indices  of  Various  Ship  Forms and Comparison		Kroda, S., "Research and Survey on the Braking 
with Experimental Results," Davidson Laboratory R-	Tugboatfor Very Large Vessels," Japan Work Vessel 
1035, September  1964.	Association, Tokyo, 1977, pp. 130.
  Jacobs,  W.R., "Method of Predicting  Course  Stabil-    Lamb,  G. and  Cook, S.,  "A  Practical  Approach  to 
ity and Turning Qualities  of Ships,"  Davidson Labo-  Rudder Design,"Shipbuilding  and  Shipping  Record, 
ratory  Report  945, March 1963.	No. 11, 1961.
  Jaeger,  H.E.,  and  Jourdain,  M.,  Le  Freinage  de   Lamb,  H.,  Hydrodynamics,   Sixth  Edition,  Dover 
Grands Navires," Bulletin de L' Association Technique Publications, New York, 1945.
Maritime  et  Aeronautique,  Paris, December 1962.			Landsburg, A.C., Card, J.C., Crane, Jr., C.L., Alman, 
Jaeger,   H.E.,  "Approximate  Calculation of Rudder	P.R., Bertsche, W.R., Boyleston, J.W., Eda, H., Keith, 
Torque  and  Rudder Pressures,"   International	Ship-		V.F., McCallum, LR., Miller, Jr., E.R., and Taplin, A., 
building   Progress,  Vol. 2, No. 10, 1955.			"Design and Verification for Adequate Ship Maneu-
Jaeger,   H.E.,  "Le  Freinage  de Grands Navires (11)	verability," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 91.
Influence  des Freins Hydrodynamiques Escamotables		Landsburg, A.C.,  Card,  J.C.,  Knierim,  T.,  Von- 
sur La Estabilitie de Route,"  Bulletin de L' Association	Breitenfeld, H.C., and Eda, H., "Proposed Shipboard 
Technique   Maritime   et   Aeronautique,   Paris,   May	Maneuvering Data," SNAME STAR Proceedings, 
1963.	1980.
  Johnson, J.L., "The Static Stability Derivatives of a Larsen, K., "Review of Previously Published Rudder  
Series of Related Bodies of Revolution,"·DTRC Report Studies," ETT TM 79, 1946.
C-383, 1951.			Lea, G.K., Feldman, J.T., "Trans critical Flow Past 
Jones,   Jr.,   W.,   "Aerodynamic  Characteristics   of	Slender Ships," Ninth Symposium a Naval Hydrody- 
Three  Low Aspect Ratio Symmetrical Wings with Rec-		namics, Paris, Government Printing Office, Washing-
tangular   Plan  Forms  at  Reynolds Numbers  between	ton, D.C., Edited by R. Brard and A. Castera, 1972.
0.4 x  106  and  3.0 x  106" NACA RM L52G18, 1952.		Loften, K., Jr., and Smith, H.A., "Aerodynamic 
Kaplan,  P., Sargent,  T.P.,  and Goodman, T.R., "The	Characteristics of NACA Airfoils at Varying Reynolds
Application  of  System  Identification  to Dynamics of	Numbers,"  NACA TN  1945, October 1949.
Naval  Craft,"  Proceedings,  Ninth  Symposium on Na-		Lyster, C.A., "Prediction Equations for Ships' Turn- 
val  Hydrodynamics,  Paris, August  1972.	ing Circles," Trans. RINA, Vol. 121, 1979.
  Kaplan,  P.  and  Sankaranarayanan,  K.,  "Hydrody-  Macovsky, M.S., Duerr,  R.J., and Jewell, D.A., "An 
namic Interaction of Ships in Shallow Channels, In- Investigation  of a Flow-Excited Vibration of the  USS 
eluding Effects of Asymmetry," Proceedings, Forrest  Sherman  DD931,"  DTRC Report  1168, Au-  
International Conference on Ship Maneuverability Pro- gust 1959.
duction  and  Achievement,  RINA, London, April/May		Mandel, P., "Some Hydrodynamic Aspects of Ap- 
1987.	pendage Design," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 61.
  Keith,  V.T., Porricelli,  J.D.,  Hooft,  J.P.,  Paymans,  Mandel, P., "Subcritical  and Supercritical  Operation 
J.P., and Witt, F.C.J., "Real Time Simulation of Tanker of Ships in Waves," Journal of Ship Research, Vol. 
Operations for the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System," 4, June 1960.
SNAME  Transactions,  Vol. 85.	"Maneuvering Devices in Ships," Naval Architect,
Kempf,   G.,   "Maneuvering    Standards  of  Ships,"	RINA, April 1974.
Deutsche   Schiffahrts   Zeitschrifft,   Hansa  No. 27/28,		Mannola, K., "New Technology and Channel De- 
1944.	sign," Navigator Z-3/75, Helsinki, Finland.
  Kerwin, Justin  E.,  Mandel,  Philip,  and  Lewis,  S.  Marino,  K.L.,  Cooper,  R.B.,  U.S.  Merchant  Ship 
Dean, "An Experimental Study of a Series of Flapped Bridge Design Standards, Maritime Administration, 
Rudders," Journal of Ship Research, December 1972, Washington, DC, October 1982.
pp. 221-239.		Martin, L.L., "Ship Maneuvering and Control in 
Kijima, K.,  "Maneuverability  of  a Ship in Confined	Wind," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 88.
Water,"   Proceedings,   International	Conference  on	Martin, M., "Analysis of Lateral Force and Moment


414	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Caused  by Yaw  during  Ship Turning," Davidson Lab-	Sperry Gyroscope Company Report GJ-2233-1019,De- 
oratory  Report  792, March 1961.	cember 1961.
  Martinusen, K., and Linnerud, I., "Techniques for Motora, S., and Couch, R., "Maneuverability of Full 
Predicting Maneuvering Characteristics of Ships at the Bodied Ships in Restricted Waters,"  University  of  
Design Stage," Ship Maneuverability Prediction Michigan, 1961.
and  Achievement,   RINA,  London, April 1987.		Motora, S., "Maneuverability at Slow Speed," Con- 
McCreight,  W.R,   "Ship  Maneuvering  in Waves,"	tribution to the 11th ITTC (Tokyo), pp. 1·4.
Symposium  Proceedings,   Office  of Naval  Research,			Motora, S., "On the Measurement of Added Mass 
Berkeley California, 1985.			and Added Moment of Inertia of Ships in Steering 
McGoldrick,  RT.,   "Rudder-Excited Hull Vibration	Motion," Proceedings, First Symposium on Ship Ma- on   
the   USS  Forrest   Sherman	DD931,"  SNAME		neuverability, David Taylor Research Center, Report
Transactions,   Vol. 67.	1461, 1960.
  McIlroy, W. and  Carpenter,  G., "Technical Aspects     Motora, S., "Proposed  Maneuverability  Indices as a  
of  Fast-Time  Simulation  at  CAORF,"  Proceedings,  Measure  of  the  Steering  Qualities  of  Ships,"  9th  
Third CAORF Symposium, Maritime Administration, IPPC.
October 1979.	Munk,  M.M., Aerodynamic	Theory of Airships,
Meijer,  M.C.,  "An   Experiment  Concerning  Party	W.F. Durand, Editor, Julius Springer, 1934.
Closed Cavities Behind a  Surface-Piercing  Rod," Cal-		Newman,   J.N.,	Marine	Hydrodynamics,	MIT 
ifornia  Institute   of Technology, Hydrodynamics Lab·	Press, 1977.
oratory  Report  E-110-1,January  1964.		Newton, RN., "Interaction Effects Between Ships 
Mikelis,  N.E.,  and  Price,  W.G., "Two Dimensional	Close Aboard in Deep Water," DTMB Report 1461,
Sway  Added  Mass  Coefficients  for  Vessels  Maneu-	October 1960.
vering  in Restricted  Waters,"  RINA Supplementary	Nichols, W.O., Ruben, M.L., Danielson, RV., "Some
Papers,  No.  121, July  1979.	Aspects  of  Large  Tanker   Design,"  SNAME  Trans-
Mikelis,  N.E.,  "A  Procedure   for  the Prediction  of	actions, Vol. 68.
Ship Maneuvering  Response  for  Initial Design, Inter-		Nielsen, RA., and Kendall, H.K., "Stern Thruster 
national Conference on Computer Application ...  etc.",	Installation on the SS John Sherwin," Marine Tech- 
ICCAS '85, North Holland Publishing Co.,Trieste 1985.	no logy, Jan. 1974.
  Mikelis, N.E., and Price, W.G., "Comparisons of Ac- Nikolaev, E., and Lebedeva, M., "On the Nature of 
celeration Coefficients and Correction Factors Asso- Scale Effect in  Maneuvering  Tests  with  Full-Bodied 
ciated Between Theory and Experiments,"  Trans.  Ship Models," Proceedings,  13th Symposium on Naval 
RINA, 1980.	Hydrodynamics, Tokyo, 1980.
  Miller, E.R, Van Dyke, P., Lord, RS.,  and  Conrad,  Nizerry,  B., and Page,  J.P.,  "Maneuvering  Tests  on 
RE.,  "The Use of Real-Time Maneuvering Simulations  the 213,000-tonTanker  (in French),"  Assn. Technique 
in the Contract Design Evaluation of a Salvage Ship," Maritime et Aeronautique, 1969.
Naval  Engineers   Journal,  January  1984.	"Nomenclature for Treating the Motion of a Sub-
  Miller, E.R, Ankudinov, V., and Termes, T., "Eval- merged Body through a Fluid," SNAME Technical and 
uation of Concepts for Improved Controllability of Research Bulletin 1-5, 1952.
Tank  Vessels,"  Marine   Technology,  Vol. 18, No.4,			Nomoto, K., "Analysis of Kempf's Standard Maneu- 
Oct. 1981.		ver Test and Proposed Steering Quality Indices," First 
Miller,  E.R,    "Model  Test   and  Simulation  Study	Symposium in Ship Maneuverability, DTRC Report
Based   on  the   Full  Scale  Esso Osaka  Maneuvering	1461, October 1960.
Data,"  U.S. Maritime  Administration Report, October			Nomoto, K., and Norrbin,  N.H.,  "A Review  of 
1980.		Methods of Defining and Measuring the Maneuvera- 
Miller, E.R,   "The  Performance   of  River Tow Ma-	bility of Ships," International Towing Tank Confer- 
neuvering  Performance,"  U.S. Coast Guard Report D-		ence,	Appendix	I,	Report	of	Maneuverability
32-78, Washington,  DC, May 1978.	Committee, Rome, 1969.
  "Model Test and Simulation Correlation Study Based    Nomoto,  K., et.  aI.,  "On  the  Steer.ing Qualities  of 
on the Full Scale Esso Osaka Maneuvering Data," Ships," International Shipbuilding Progress, Vol. .•• 
Hydronautics, Inc., Maritime Administration, Wash- No. 35, 1957.
ington,  D.C., October 1980.			Nomoto, K., "Response Analysis of Maneuverability 
Moody, C.G., "The Handling of Ships through a Wid-	and its Application to Ship Design, Researches on the 
ened and Asymmetrically Deepened Section of Gaillard		Maneuverability of Ships in Japan," Society of Naval
Cut in the Panama  Canal," DTRC Report 1705,August	Architects of Japan, Tokyo, 1966.
1964.		Nomoto, K., "Ship Response in Directional Control 
Moody C.G., "The Handling of Ships in the Panama	Taking Account of Frequency Dependent Hydrody-
Canal,"  DTRC Report  1705, August  1964.	namic Deravitives," Proceedings, Vol. 2, International 
Morse,  RV.,  and  Price,  D., "Maneuvering  Charac-	Towing Tank Conference, 1975.
teristics   of  the   Mariner   Class  Ship  in Calm Seas,"	Nomoto, K., "Some Aspects of Simulator Studies_


CONTROLLABILITY	415

Ship Handling,"  International  Symposium on Practical		Ratio Coefficients for Swaying Ship-Like Cylinders," 
Design  in Shipbuilding, 1977.		Journal of Ship Research, Dec. 1966. SNAME Prin- 
Norrbin,  N.H., "Theory  and Observation  on the Use	ciples of Naval Architecture, Vol. II, Chapter 4, Figs.
of a Mathematical Model for Ship Maneuvering in Deep	6, 7, and 8, 1939.
and Confined Waters,"  Swedish State Shipbuilding Ex-		Prohaska, C.W., "The Vertical Vibration of Ships," 
perimental  Towing  Tank,  Publication 68, 1971.	Shipbuilding	and Marine Engine Builder, October-
Norrbin,  N.H.,  and Williams, A.,  "The SSPA Steer-	November 1947.
ing  and Maneuvering  Simulator,"  Report  No. 40 (2nd			Puglisi, J.J., "History and Future Developments in 
Ed.),  The  Swedish  State   Shipbuilding  Experimental		the Application of Marine Simulators, Tomorrow's 
Tank, March 1974.		Challenge Role for the International Marine Simulator 
Norrbin,   N.H.,   "Bank   Effects   on  a Ship Moving	Forum (IMSF)," Proceedings, MARS1M '87, Trond-
Through   a   Short   Dredged  Channel,"  Proceedings,	heim, Norway, June 22-24, 1987.
Tenth   Symposium   on  Naval  Hydrodynamics,  Cam-			Puglisi, Jo3.,VanHoorde, G., Kaufman, E., and Eda, 
bridge,  Massachusetts,  1974.		H., "The Proposed Plan for Widening of the Panama 
NTSB, "Marine Collisions ...  ," MSS-81-1,Washing-	Canal and Application of Simulator Techniques for the 
ton, D.C., 1981.		Development and Validation of the Proposed Solu- 
Oakley,  Jr.,   O.H.,  Pauling,   J.R.,  and Wood, P.D.,	tion," Proceedings, MARS1M '84, Rotterdam, Neth-
"Ship  Motions  and  Capsizing  in  Astern Seas,"  Pro-	erlands.
ceedings, Tenth Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics,			Ribadeau   Dumas,   L.R,	"Ports	and Navigation 
Cambridge, Massachusetts,  1974.		Aids," Trans. First International Symposium on Ship 
Ohtagaki,  Y., and Tanaka,  M., "Application of Real-	Approach and Berthing Maneuvers, Grenoble, France,
Time  Ship  Maneuvering   Simulator   in  the Past  Ten	1977.
Years,"  Proceedings  MARS1M '84, June  1984.			Ribadeau Dumas, L.R, "Problems Arising from the 
Okamoto, H., Tamai, H., and Oniki, H., "Correlation	Navigation of Large and Very Large Ships in Narrow 
Studies  of Maneuverability  of Full  Ships," 13th Inter-		Channels and Port Entrances," IX International Con-
national  Towing  Tank Conference,  Berlin/Hamburg,	ference on Lighthouses and Other Aids to Navigation, 
1972.	IALA/ AISM Ottawa, 1975.
  Olson, C.R., "Effect  of Linkage Ratio and Flap Area      Ridley, V.W., and  Henkin, Y., "Upgrading  Steering 
on the Free Stream Characteristics of an All-Movable Gear Systems from Inception to Operation," SNAME 
Flapped Rudder," DTRC Report 991, September 1955. Transactions, 1982.
  Oltmann, P., and Sharma, S.D., "Simulation of Com- Riek, J.,  Tenenbaum,  S., McIlroy, W., "An  Investi- 
bined Engine and Rudder Maneuveres. Using an Im- gation into the  Safety  of  Passage  of  Large  Tankers 
proved Model of Hull-Propeller-Rudder Interactions," in the Puget Sound Area, Vol. 1," U.S. Maritime Ad- 
Proceedings, 15th ONR Symposium on Naval Hydro- ministration NMRC, Kings Point, 1978.
dynamics, Hamburg,  1984.		Romahn, K., and Thieme, H., "On the Selection of 
Panel  H-10, "Proposed  Procedures for Determining	Balance Area for Rudders Working in the Slip
Ship  Controllability  Requirements  and Capabilities,"	Stream," Schiffstechnic No. 21, 1957.
Proceedings,    First   Ship  Technology  and  Research	Roseman, D.P., The MARAD Systematic Series of
(STAR) Symposium, SNAME, August  1975.	Full-Form Ship Models, SNAME, 1987.
  Pauling, J.R., Sibul, OJ., "New Experiment and Roseman, D.P., Gertler, M., and Kohl, R.E., "Char-  
Techniques for the Experimental Evaluation of Ship's acteristics of Bulk Products  Carriers  for  Restricted- 
Lateral Stability," University of California, Berkley, Draft Service," SNAME Transactions, 1974.
August  1962.	Rossell, H.E. and Chapman, L.B., "Principles of
  Pauling, J.R., and Wood, L.W., "The Dynamic Prob-  Naval  Architecture,"  (Schoenherr, K.E., "Propulsion 
lem of Two Ships Operating on Parallel Courses in and Propellers") Vol. 2, SNAME, 1939.
Close Proximity,"  University  of  California Series 189,	Rules  for   the  Construction    and   Classification of
July  1962.	Steel  Ships,  Det  norske  Veritas,  Oslo, 1975, pg. 102.
  Peach, RW., "A  Method for  Determining  Acceler-  Rydill,L.J.,  "A Linear Theory for the Steered Motion 
ation of a Ships," International Shipbuilding Prog- of Ships in Waves," Trans. INA, 1959.
ress, June  1963.		Sargent, T.P., and Kaplan, P., "System Identifica- 
Perez  y  Perez,  L., "A Time-Domain Solution to the	tion of Surface Ship Dynamics, "Oceanics Inc., NTIS
Motions of a Steered  Ship in Waves," Journal  of Ship	(AD-712448),1970.
Research,   SNAME, March 1974.			Sato, S., Takagi, Hikino, et. aI., "On A Study of Ship- 
PIANC  International  Commission for the Reception	Controllability of a Wide-Beam Tanker," Journal, So- of 
Large Ships (ICORELS), Working Group No.4: "III.		ciety of Naval Architects, Japan, Vol. 134, Dec.
Recommendations  Concerning Approach Channels and	1973.
Maneuvering    Areas   for   Large	Ships"   November	Saunders, H.E., "Hydrodynamics in Ship Design,"
1977.	SNAME, 1957.
Porter,   W.R,   "Added  Mass,  Damping and Wave-	Schoenherr, K.E., "A Program for the Investigation


416	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

of the  Rudder  Torque  Problem," Marine  Technology,	Forces and Yaw Moments of Merchant Ships," Mari- 
SNAME, July  1965.	time Administration, Washington, D.C., July 1983.
  Schoenherr,   K.E.,  "Bank   Suction  Effects on Mer-		Stuntz, G., and Taylor, R., "Some Aspects of Bow 
chant   Ship  Hulls  in  Restricted   Waters," First  Sym-	Thruster Design," SNAME Transactions, Vol. 72. 
posium  on Ship Maneuverability,  DTRC Report  1461,		Suarez, A., "Rotating Arm Experimental Study of 
October 1960.	a Mariner Class Vessel," Davidson Laboratory Note
Schoenherr,  K.E.,  "Data  for  Estimating Bank Suc-	696, June 1963.
tion Effects in Restricted  Water  on  Merchant  Ship  Sukselainen,  J.,  "On Ship Maneuvering  and  Water- 
Hulls," First Symposium on Ship Maneuverability, way  Width"  Helsinki  University  of Technology,  Fin- 
DTRC Report  1461, October 1960.	land, 1975.
  Segel,  Leonard,  "Ship  Maneuverability  as  Influ-  Surber,  Jr.,  W.C., "An Investigation  of the  Flow in  
enced by Transient Response to the Helm," First Sym- the Region of the Rudder of a Free-Turning Model of 
posium on Ship Maneuverability, DTRC Report 1461, a Multiple-Screw Ship," DTRC Report 998, 1955.
October 1960.	Szeto, F.F., "Systems Identification from Ship Ma-
  Shiba,  H.,  "Model  Experiments   about the  Maneu-	neuver in Currents," Masters Thesis, Massachusetts 
verability  of  Turning  of  Ships,"  First Symposium on	Institute of Technology, May 1977.
Ship  Maneuverability,   DTRC  Report  1461, October	Taggart,	R.,   Ship	Design	and	Construction,
1960.	SNAME, New York, 1980.
  Silverstein, B.L., "Linearized Theory  of  the  Inter-  Taggart,  R.,  Kobayashi,  S.,  "Anamalous  Behavior 
action of Ships," University of California, Institute of of Merchant Ship Steering Systems," Marine Tech- 
Engineering   Research, May 1957.	nology, April, 1970.
  Smitt, L.W., "Comparative Results from Different Taniguchi,  K.,  et  aI, "Investigations  into  the  Fun- 
Captive Model Test Techniques," Proceedings, Inter- damental Characteristics and Operating Performance 
national  Towing Tank Conference, 1975.	of Side Thrusters," Mitsubishi Technical Bulletin No.
Smitt,  L.W.,  and  Chislett, M.S., "Couse-Stability	35, 1966.
While Stopping,"  Journal  of Engineering Science, Vol.		Taplin, A. and Atkinson, J.A., "Rudder Rate Tests 
14, No.7,  1972.	on the U.S. Coast Guard Cutter Gallatin (WHEC
Smitt,  L.W., "Steering  and Maneuvering of Ships-	721)," SNAME T & R Bulletin 1-43, 1987.
Full Scale and ModelTests," European  Shipbuilding,		Taplin, A., "Sea Trials for Measuring Rudder Torque 
Parts  I and  II,  No.6,   1970, and No.1,  1971.	and Force," Trans., Fourth Ship Control Systems Sym-
Smitt,  L.W.  and  Chislett,  M.S., "Large  Amplitude	posium, Den Helder, Holland, 1975.
PMM Tests  and Maneuvering  Predictions  for  a Mari-    Taplin, A., "Note  on Rudder Design Practice,"  First 
ner Class Vessel, "Proceedings of the Tenth Sympo-  Symposium  on  Ship  Maneuverability,  DTRC Report 
sium on Naval Hydrodynamics, ONR Publication ACR- 1461, 1960.
204, 1974.	Technical Research Center of Finland, "Zigzag Ma-
  SNAME  Panel  H-I0  (Ship Controllability), "Proce-	neuvering Data Analysis," COST 301/SF/VTT/T1. 01 
dures   for   Determining   Ship Contollability Require-	OP 5, October 1984.
ments  and  Capabilities,"  Proceedings SNAME STAR		Thieme, H., "Design of Ship Rudders," DTRCTrans- 
Symposium,  Washington, DC, 1975.	lation No. 321, by E. N. LaBouvie, November 1965.
  "Special  Study-Marine	Collisions  and Effects  of		Thwaites,  R,  Incompressible   Aerodynamics,	Ox- 
Preventive   Recommendations," National Transporta-	ford University Press, England, 1960.
tion  Safety  Board, NTSB-MSS-81-1,September 1981.		Todd, F.H., "Propeller Action in a Single Screw 
Steele,  B.N.,  and  Harding,  M.H., "The Application	Ships," DTRC June 1951.
of Rotating Cylinders to Ship Maneuvering," National Todd, F.H., "Some Further Experiments  on Single 
Physical  Laboratory,   Ship  Division, London,  Report   Screw   Merchant   Ship  Forms-Series   60,  SNAME 
No. 148, 1970.	Transactions, 1953.
  Stilwell, J.J.,  Nelson,  P.W., and  Porter, W.R., "Hy-		Trankle, T.L., "Practical Aspects of System Identi- 
drofoils  at  the  Crossroads,"   IAS Paper 61-44, 1961.	fication," ASME paper 79-WA/DSC-23, presented at
Strandhagen,   A.G,  Schoenherr,   K.E., and  Koboy-	Winter Annual Meeting, December 1979.
ashi, F.M., "The Dynamic Stability on Course of Towed			Trankle, T.L., "Identification of Ship Steering Dy- 
Ships,"  SNAME  Transaction, Vol. 58.		namics Using Inertial Sensors," Seventh IFAC sym- 
Strom-Tejsen, J., "A Digital Computer Technique for	posium on Identification and Parameter Estimation,
the   Prediction   of   Standard   Maneuvers  of  Surface	New York, July 1985.
Ships,"  DTRC Report  2130, December 1965.	Trankle, T.L., "Status of MARCIS:The Marine Coef-
  Strom-Tejsen, J.,  and Chislett,  M.S., "A Model Test-	ficient Identification System," American Towing Tank 
ing Technique  and Method of Analysis for  the Predic-	Conference, Washington, D.C., 1986.
tion of Steering and Maneuvering Qualities of Surface Tsakonas,  S. "Effect  of Appendage  and  Hull Form 
Ships"  Hydro-Og  Aerodynamisk  Laboratorium  Re-  on the  Hydrodynamic  Coefficients of Surface  Ships," 
port  No. HyA  7, Lyngby,  Denmark, June 1964.	Davidson LaboratoryReport 740, May 1959.
Strumpf,   A.,  "Calculation   of Hydrodynamic  Side	Tuck, E.O., and Newman, J.N., "Hydrodynamic In-


CONTROLLABILITY	417

teraction   Between  Ships,"  Proceedings  of the  Tenth	Characteristics of a Family of Low Aspect Ratio Con- 
Symposium  on Naval  Hydrodynamics, ONR, 1974.	trol Surfaces for Application to Ship Design," DTRC
Tuck, E.O., "Shallow Water  Flows Past Slender Bod-	Report 933, 1958.
ies,"  Journal   of  Fluid Mechanics,  1966.			Wilson, M.B., and Von Kerczek, C., "An Inventory 
Tuck,  E.O., "Sinkage  and Trim in Shallow Water of	of Some Force Producers for Use In Marine Vehicle 
Finite Width," Schiffstechnik,	Bd. 14, 1967.		Control," David Taylor Research Center, No. 79/097,
Van Donselaar, H., LazetA.,  Schuffel, H., and Weps-	November 1979.
ter,  A., Merchant	Vessel  Bridge  Lay-Out,   Nether-		Windsor, R.I., "Survey of Low Aspect Ratio Char- 
lands  Maritime  Institute,	Rotterdam,   Netherlands,	acteristics Useful in the Design of Control Surfaces," 
1979.			University of Maryland Wind Tunnel Report 62-1,
Van  Lammeren,   W.P.A.,  Troost,   L., and  Koning,	1962.
J.G.,  Resistance,   Propulsion    and  Steering of Ships,			Wise, D.A., and English, J.W., "Tank and Wind Tun- 
Technical  Publishing  Company, Holland, 1948.		nel Tests for a Drill Ship with Dynamic Position Con- 
Van Leeuwen,  G., "The Lateral  Damping and Added	trol," Paper No. OTC 2345, Offshore Technology
Mass of a Horizontally  Oscillating Ship Model," Neth-	Conference, 1975.
erlands  Research  Center  Report  65S, December 1964.		Wride, A.T.A., Wills, A.E., and Leckenby, "Behavior 
Vantine,  W.H.,  "Good  Ship  Bridge  Design from a	of Large Ships in Shallow and Confined Waters
Master  Mariner's  Point of View," Ship Operation Au-	(Southampton)," NPL Report Mar Sci R121, 1975. 
tomation,	Proceedings,	IFAC/IFIP	Symposium,		Yamaguchi, A., et aI, "Full Scale Tests on Sinkage 
Washington,  DC, 1976.			of Super-Tankers Through  Shallow Water,"  Kobe Uni-
  Veldhuyzen,  W., and Stassen,  H.G., "Internal  Model	versity of Mercantile  Marine, Memoirs,  1968. 
Concept: An Application to  Modelling Human Control		Yamaguchi, A., et aI, "Model Tests on  Sinkage  of 
of Large  Ships,"  Human  Factors,  Vol. 19, Aug. 1977.	Vessels Underway  in Restricted  Channels," Kobe Uni-
Wahab,  R., and Swaan, W.A., "Course  Keeping and	versity of Mercantile Marine, Memoirs, 1967.
Broaching  of  Ships in  Following Waves," Journal  of	Yeh,  H., "NS  Savannah	Shallow Water Mooring
Ship   Research, April 1964.	Test," DTRC Report 1883, August 1964.
  Wang,  S., Discussion  of  Reference. (Tuck, 1979).			Yoshimura, Y., and Nomoto, K., "Modeling of Ma- 
Weinig,  F.,  "Lift   and  Drag   of  Wings with  Small	neuvering Behavior of Ships with a Propeller Idling, 
Span,"  NACA TM 1151, 1947.		Boosting, and Reversing," (In Japanese), Journal of 
Whicker,   L.F.,   and   Fehlner,   L.F., "Free   Stream	Society of Naval Architects of Japan, Vol. 144, 1978.


418











Angles


NOME
NCLAT
URE  
CONTR
OLLAB
ILITY	419
u
1
	
i
n
i
t
i
a
l
 
e
q
u
i
l
i
b
r
i
u
m
 
v
a
l
u
e
 
o
f
 
u


cf, (phi) roll angle, measured from the vertical 
XZo plan to the z-axis of the ship; 
positive in the positive sense of ro­ 
tation about the x-axis
8 (theta) pitch angle, measured from the hori­ 
zontal x0y0 plane to the x-axis of the 
ship; positive in the positive sense 
of rotation about the y0-axis
l/J (psi) yaw angle, measured from the vertical 
x0z0 plane to the x-axis of the ship; 
positive in the positive sense of ro­ 
tation about the z0-axis
l/10  (psi)    amplitude of yaw oscillation in planar 
motion tests
a (alpha)	angle of attack on a control surface
a (alpha) angle of attack in pitch on the hull, 
measured from the resultant ship 
velocity V to the xy0-plane
/3 (beta) angle of attack in yaw on the hull (or 
drift angle), measured from the re­
sultant ship velocity V to the xz-

 


v1	initial equilibrium value of v
u0	component of V along the x0-axis
6R   (delta)	rate  of  deflection  of  rudder  or  other 
control surface
Forces
D drag force; component of a resultant total 
force parallel to the direction of motion, 
developed as a result of an angle of 
attack
(CD, drag coefficient, = Dl½pAUZ)
F component of the total force on a con­ trol 
surface normal to the center­ plane of 
the surface
(CN, normal force coefficient, = FI
½pAU2)
L lift force; component of a resultant total 
force normal to the direction of mo­ 
tion, developed as a result of an angle of 
attack
(CL, lift coefficient, = Ll½pAU2


plane


X0,


Yo, Zo,}


components of a resultant 
total force


     /3R inflow angle at the rudder (see Fig. 22) 
6R (delta)	angular displacement of the rudder, 
measured from the xz-plane of the
ship to the plane of the rudder
6F (delta)	angular deflection of the control-sur­ 
face flap, measured from the plane


X, Y, z
xo, yo, zo


acting at the origin O directed along the Xo, Yo, Zo and 
x, y, z-axes, respec­ tively
values of X, Y, and Z at  v  =   r  =  w =
q =   v  =   r =   w =   q  =   O and V
= U1


of the control surface to the plane 
of the flap
E (epsilon)	phase angle
E (epsilon)	straightening influence of hull and 
propeller on the flow to the rudder
Translational and Angular Velocities and Accelera­ 
tions
U resultant velocity of the fluid relative 
to a control surface or a fixed fin
Vo resultant velocity, relative to the 
earth, of the origin 0. (In general, 
except for fluid motions induced 
either by movement of the ship or 
by waves, the fluid in which the ship


Force Derivatives
Yv	partial derivative of  Y  with respect to
V
Y.	partial derivative of  Y  with respect to
v
Yr	partial derivative of  Y  with respect to
r
Y,	partial derivative  of  Y  with respect to
r
Y8	partial derivative  of  Y  with  respect to
6R
partial derivative of Yo with respect to the 
ahead velocity component u


p, q, r}
(4>,  iJ, ti,)
u, v, w,
(f!,  q,  )}
(cf,, 8, l/J)
u, v, w


is moving is 
assumed to be 
station- ary 
relative to the 
earth.)t
components of 
resultant angular 
ve­ locity of the 
ship about the x, 
y, and z-axes, 
respectively
components of V 
along the x, y, 
and z-axes, 
respectively
components of 
resultant angular 
ac­ celeration of 
the ship about the 
ship axes
components of 
resultant linear 
accel­ eration of 
the ship, V along 
the ship axes


Zw  
partial 
derivative 
of z with 
respect to 
w
Zw   
partial 
derivative 
of z with  
respect to
w
etc.
Linearized Force 
Components
Yvv
	
l
i
n
e
a
r
i
z
e
d
 
Y
-
c
o
m
p
o
n
e
n
t
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
e
d
 
a
s
 
a
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
 
o
f
 
a
 
d
r
i
f
t
 
a
n
g
l
e
,
 
/
3
 
:
:
:
:
:
 
-
v
 
I
V
Y.v 
l
i
n
e
a
r
i
z
e
d
 
Y
-
c
o
m
p
o
n
e
n
t 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
e
d
 
a
s 
a 
r
e
s
u
l
t 
o
f 
a
n
 
a
c
c
e
l
e
r
a
t
i
o
n
, 
v
Yvr
	
l
i
n
e
a
r
i
z
e
d
 
Y
-
c
o
m
p
o
n
e
n
t
 
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
e
d
 
a
s
 
a
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
 
o
f
 
a
n
 
a
n
g
u
l
a
r
 
v
e
l
o
c
i
t
y
,
 
r


420	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE



Y1r	linearized Y-component developed as a 
result of an angular acceleration, r
Y118R	linearized Y-component developed as a 
result of a rudder angle,
Z.,,w linearized z-component developed as a
result of an angle of attack, a :::; w
z,.w linearized z-component developed as a 
result of an acceleration, w
etc.
Momenta
K, M, N components of a resultant total moment 
acting on a ship about the x, y , and z-
axes, respectively; referred to  as the 
rolling, pitching, and yawing mo­ 
ments, respectively
M', N°	values of M and N at v = r = w = q
= ii = r = w = iJ = 0 and V =
U1




















Notes









M,,w





linearized N-component developed as a
result of an angular velocity, r
linearized N component developed as a result of an 
acceleration, ii
linearized N-component developed as a result of an 
angular acceleration, r linearized N-component 
developed as a
result of a deflection angle, aR
linearized N-component developed as a result	of
	an	angle	of	attack,
w
a::= V
linearized M-component developed as a
result of an angular velocity, q
linearized M-component developed as a
result of a pitch angle, 8
linearized K-component developed as a
result of a drift angle, /3 ::= - ; 


Q-a, 4    moment  of  normal  force  on  a  control 
surface about quarter chord;
-	Qu_.
  

1.	Signs of all directions, forces, distances, 
veloc­ ities, and accelerations are positive 
downward along  the z-axis, positive to starboard 
along the y-axis, and


Cmu-.	(pl2)AU2c


positive forward 
along the x-axis, and 
similarly along


Qn	moment of hydrodynamic normal force 
about rudder stock;
QH
m =	(p/2)AU2c
Moment Derivatives
N.,    partial derivative  of  N with respect  to
V
Nr	partial  derivative  of  N with  respect to
r
N,	partial derivative  of N  with respect   to
ii
N1 partial derivative of N with respect to
r
N11 partial derivative of N with respect to
8R
M.,,   partial derivative  of  M with respect to
w
Mq   partial derivative  of  M with respect to
q
M,	partial derivative of M with respect to
8
K,,   partial  derivative  of  K with  respect to
V

Linearized Moment Components
N,,v linearized N-component developed as a 
result of a drift angle, /3 :::; - ; 


the Xo, Yo, and z0-axes
  2.	Signs of all signs, angular velocities, 
angular accelerations and moments (except 
control-surface torques and bending moments) are 
positive if clockwise when facing in the positive 
direction of the appropriate axis. Rudder torques 
are positive if the center of pres­ sure is forward 
of the point about which the torques are taken.
  3.	All inertia and mass characteristics are 
assumed as positive.
  4.	The prime superscript ('), except where 
other­ wise stated, indicates the value of an item 
nondimen­ sionalized on the basis of a 
combination of p, L (or T), and V or powers 
thereof.
  5.	The subscript (1), except where otherwise 
stated, indicates the initial equilibrium value of a 
distance, velocity, or angle.
  6.	The supscript (0), except where otherwise 
stated, indicates force, distance, velocity, and 
acceleration components along the earth's (x0,  Yo,  
z0)  axes  rather than along the ship's (x, y, z) axes.

Arranged Alphabetically
AF area of  flap of  a  control  
surface AM		movable area 
of a control surface Ar	total 
area of a control surface
AR rudder area
a	effective aspect ratio
aa	geometric aspect ratio
b	span of a control surface (see Fig. 27)
b	mean span of a control surface


NOMENCLATURE  CONTROLLABILITY	421


c	chord of a control surface (see Fig. 27)
c	mean chord of a control surface
Cr	root chord
c1	tip chord
Cv	drag coefficient = D/(p/2)AU2
CL   lift coefficient  = L/  (p/ 2)AU2
CN	 normal force coefficient = F/ (p/ 2)AU2 
CP	center of pressure
D		drag force, parallel to direction of flow 
d	distance from leading edge of a control 
surface at c to axis of rotation
F	component of total force normal to cen­ 
terplane of control surface
/	mass moment of inertia of the ship
K	component about the x-axis of the total 
moment acting on the ship (rolling 
moment)
k	Lamb's coefficients of accession
 L	lift force, normal to the direction of flow 
M	component about the y-axis of the total 
moment acting on the ship (pitching
moment)
N component about the z-axis of the total 
moment acting on the ship (yawing 
moment)
m	mass per unit length
0	origin of reference axes, fixed in the 
ship
p	component of angular velocity about


/l (Delta)	mass displacement
6 (delta)	angle of deflection of a control surface; 
increment
61 (delta)	angle of flap relative to control surface
E (epsilon)	straightening influence of hull and pro­ peller 
on flow to rudder;
phase angle
8 (theta)	angle of pitch
A (lambda)	sweepback angle
X (lambda)	taper ratio
u (sigma)	stability index cf> 
(phi)	angle of roll l/J (psi)
	angle of yaw
Special Symbols
t.	denotes baseline
t.	centerline
00 middlength, in general
V	vol volume of displacement
Mathematical Symbols
a is a partial derivative sign
i isFI
::::: approximately equal to
<	less than
>	greater than
x	(one dot over a variable) is the first


the x-axis (rolling)	.
q	component of angular velocity about 
the y-axis (pitching)
R	turning radius
r	component of angular velocity about 
the z-axis (yawing)
u	component of V along the x-axis
v	component of V along the y-axis
U	resultant velocity of the fluid relative 
to a control surface or a fixed fin.
V	resultant velocity of 0, relative to the 
earth
w	component of V along the z-axis
X	component of total resultant force 
along the x-axis
x	longitudinal axis through 0
Y	component of total resultant force 
along the y-axis
y	transverse axis through 0
Z	component of total resultant force 
along the z-axis
z	vertical axis through 0
a (alpha)	angle of attack in pitch;
angle of attack on a control surface
/3 (beta)	angle of attack in yaw (drift angle)
/JR inflow angle at the rudder


derivative of the variable
x	(two dots over a variable) is the second 
derivative of the variable
proportional to
oo	infinity
6 (delta)	a finite increment 
(Sigma)	summation of
1r  (pi)	ratio of circumference of circle to di- 
ameter
integral of
.f	some function of
--+	approaches as a limit is 
identical to
=	equal to
#:- not equal to
equal to or greater than equal 
to or less than
integration around a closed curve
Acronyms Used in References
ABS	American Bureau of Shipping
ATMA	Association Maritime Technique et 
Aeronautique, Paris
ASME	American Society of Mechanical En­ 
gineers


422	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE





U.S. Naval Ship Systems Command 
neers and Shipbuilders








rine Engineers




 
International System of Units {Systeme lntematlonal d'Unltes, or SI) Useful quantities for Naval Architedure




Quantity

Base Unit.a


C
o
n
v
e
r
s
i
o
n
s
SI Unit	Definition	English to SI	SI to English



Length 
Mass 
Time
Supplementary Unit.a 
Angle, plane
Density of solids
       of liquids 
Distance
Force

Frequency 
Mass 
Power

Pressure 
Specific vol. 
Stress
Volume of solids
of liquids

Velocity



meter, m 
kilogram,kg 
second, s


radian, rad



nautical mile, knot

newton, N 
kilonewton, kN

hertz,Hz metric 
ton, t
watt, W
kilowatt, kW 
kilopascal,kPa 
I/density 
megapascal, MPa
ma
liter, L

meters/sec 
knot







1 rad = 180"/tt
kg/ cm3 or 
t / m3 kg/L

1.852 km

1 kg-m/ s 2
103 kg-
m/s2 
cycle/ sec, 
cps 1G3 
kg
1 N-m/s
1 kN-m/s

IG3 N/ m2

m3 / t
MN / m2 = N / mm2


mis
1 nmi/hr = 1.852 
km/kr.



1 ft= 0.305m
1 lb = 0.454 kg






1 lb (force) = 4.45N


1 long ton (weight) = 
1.016 t

1 hp = 0.746 kW
1 lb/ in2 = 6.895 kPa

1 long ton/ in2 = 
15.44 MPa


lft/sec = 0.305 m/s


lm	= 3.28 ft
1 kg	= 2.20 lb






1 knot  = 6,080 ft
1 N	= 0.225 lb


It	= 0.98 long 
tons

lkW	= 
1.34 hp 
lkPa	= 
0.15 lb / in1

lMPa = 0.065 long 
tons/ in2


lm/s = 3.28 ft/sec



 








Index
ABC  Harbor,   325	Aspect   ratio  (control   surface)	Canals
Acceleration	effective,  235, 299	course-keeping in, 282, 326
effect  of  propeller   on, 397	effect  of,  298	interaction with, 279
instantaneous	propeller,   253	of  a fin, 235	Canted rudders, 367
fin derivatives,    235	of  a  bare  hull,  236	CAORF Simulator, 359
time   and  distance   required,   251	Astern   seas	Capsizing, 83
Accelerations	effect  of,  274	Cavitation, rudder, 293


amplitudes   of,  125	Augmentation (control)
due  to  rolling,  73	drag, 404, 408
forces   due  to,  125	operational techniques, 404
heaving,   99	propulsion, 404
Added  Mass	rudders, 404
hydrodynamic,    51	thrusting devices, 404, 407
coefficient   of, 53, 57	Automatic control; see control automatic
coefficients,  238, 248	Auto pilots, 264
concept,   198	adaptive, 266
of  a fin, 235	tuning, 264
on  a  turning   ship,  194	Auxiliary stopping devices, 263


Celerity, wave, 4, 6
Center of  pressure  (control  surface),  221, 292
Climatology, wave, 34
Coasting (to a stop), 251, 261 Coefficients
added mass, 53, 57
damping, 53, 57
diffraction, 53
equations of motion, 53, 57, 65 Ogilvie & Tuck, 53


forces, 194
  (vertical acceleration), 42 
Added resistance
effects   of, 119
spectrum of, 119
Advance, turning definition, 209 
Aeration of rudders, 293, 367 
Airfoil sections
control surfaces, 291
  rudders, 382 
Amplitudes
exciting, 58


Backing  maneuvers,    251	Coefficient (control surface)
times,   d~tances,   velocities,  
262	drag, 234, 295
Balance   of rudders,   383	lift, 234, 295
Bech  spiral  maneuver,   204	Coefficients (nonlinear)
Bending  moment	added mass, 238, 248
in  waves,   hull, 102, 109	equations of motion, 227, 228, 264
rudder   stock,  292	Coefficients (model), 249
Bernoulli's   Theorem	drift, 250
applied   to waves,  7	error cancellation, 250
equation,   48	Computations, response, 92
Bilge  keels,   79, 127, 170	Compound gravity waves, 11


forces   and  moments,   124	Bow	Computers
Angle  of attack	effect  of  flare,  115	simulation of stopping, 259
control  surface,   236	impact  on,  116	Computer programs, motion
fixed  fine, 234	planes   (submersible),    323, 367	Frank's method, 60
Anti-pitching   devices,  136	rudders,   366	Lewis·forms, 60
Anti-rolling    devices,  active,  133	Bow motions	hybrid method, 63
control  of,  133	influence   of  shape  on, 115	3-dimensional   methods,   65
fin stabilizers,    134	kinematic   solution,   112	seakeeping    data   base,  109
gyroscopic    stabilizers,   133, 135	relative,   112	Confidence level, 91
tanks,   136	shipping  water,   112	Conformal mapping, 61


Anti-rolling    devices,   passive,  79, 127	Braking flaps, 262
bilge  keels,  170	Bretschneider wave spectrum, 37


Constant pressure, 7


sails,  127	Bridge  simulators,    360	Contours, wave, 7
tanks,   127	Broaching	Control,   automatic,   264
Appendages	definition,  274	unstable    vessels,  265
effect   of, 234, 333	danger   of,  277	hydrofoils, 267


424


INDEX	425
Control  considerations,    317	Damping	Environmental effects (continued)
device  design,   364	coefficients,   motion,   53, 57, 60	waves,	272
requirements,	320	dynamic,   118	Equations    of  motion,   2, 41
Controls-fixed    motion   stability,   195, 199,	estimation    of roll,  81	coefficients   of,  53,  57, 65
    265	hydrodynamic,    43, 51	controls fixed, 198, 193, 264 
Control   forces   and  moments	of roll,  100	linear,	196
derivatives,    198	wave  system,   24	linearized,	51
experimental    determination,    221	wave  radiation,   101	maneuvering, 196, 217
Control   loops  (the),   192	d' Alembert    forces,  122, 194	Newton's,	193
Control,   ship  motions,   126	Deadwood   (fixed  fin)	nonlinear,	217
roll,  127	derivatives   of, 242	pitching   and  heaving,	42
pitch,  136	effect   of, 241, 314	with automatic control
Control   surface    (also   see rudder),   292	Decrement    of roll, 82	with   six  degrees   of freedom,	45
center   of  pressure,    221	Definitive  maneuvers,    206	Esso Osaka tests,	319
design   of,  221, 364	Degrees    of freedom,   45	Exciting   forces,   wave,	67
effect  of,  221	Derivatives, control
aspect   ratio,   236, 299	prediction   of, 236	"Feelers",	hydrofoil,	268
fixed  structure,    310	Derivatives,   hydrodynamic	Fetch, 5, 24
profile  shape,  305	comparison   prediction,   243	Fins, fixed
thickness,   305	control  force,  198	added mass of, 235
experimental    techniques,   221	full-scale  tests,   231	aspect  ratio,	235
forces   and   moments    on, 221, 292	model  tests,   243	contribution of, 234 
effect on
stability in turning, 235, 333, 350
maneuvering,	235
Fins, moveable; see rudders, planes
rotating-arm    technique,   222	of stability,   200	Flanking   rudders,	370
section   shapes,   303	Derived  responses,   2	Flaps
  stall,   227, 293, 375	Design   for  seakeeping,    109, 160		braking, 262, 263 
Control   surface   coefficients;  see	Det   norske  Veritas,   370	Following seas
    coefficients	Diagram   of  Steering,   328		effect of, 274 
Control  systems	Diameter,    tactical,   209, 297, 348	Forces
automatic,    192, 264	Dieudonne    spiral maneuver,   202	components,	196
input  data,   266	Diffraction   problem,  49	control  and  moments,	198
time-lag   effects,  266	coefficients  of, 53	d' Alembert,	194
Controllability	Directional    stability,    see stability,   motion	derivatives,	197
application    to design,  327	Doppler   shift,  22, 24	during   maneuvers,	194
piloted,  325	Drag	wind  and  wave,	194
of submarines,    323	coefficient,  234 .	hydrodynamics,	194
of  high-speed   craft,   325	control  surface,   234	inertial   reaction,	194
standards	locked  propeller,   262	Forces,   ship  motions,	124
relation    to tests,   320	Drift	exciting, 42, 50, 58, 67, 123
status    of development,    320	angle  of,  193	d' Alembert, 122, 194
Correlation	effect,  398	fluid, 46
maneuvering     prediction  of,  232	Dutch  roll,  83	hydrostatic,	47
Course  (ship's)	Dynamic  behavior	hydrodynamic, 49, 194
changing    ability,  191, 317	in wind,  268	radiating, 42, 51
keeping   ability	in  shallow  water,   280	restoring,	42
in  astern   seas,  274	in  narrow  channels,   282	Forces   and  moments,   rudder,	292
evaluation   of,  317	Dynamic   impulse,  255, 256	Fourier  technique,  4,  14 
in  proximity    to  another  ship,  287	Dynamic  positioning,   268	Frank's   method,	60
    in  restricted   waters,   279	Dynamic   potential,   255, 256	Freeboard 
Crash   astern    maneuver    (stop),  251, 258,	Dynamic  stability		bow, 113
317,318,397	discriminant,    201	nominal,	114
Criteria	prediction   of, 350	ratio,	167
stability,   200, 317	Frequency, also see Period
discussion,    prescribed    values,  142, 144	Effective   wave  length,   105	natural,	103
governing,    144	Encounter    frequency,    22,  41, 80, 104	of pitch and heave, 69, 103
limiting   valves,   142	Energy	of roll, 78, 103
seakeeping    performance,     3, 137, 223	of waves,  8	of encounter, 22, 41, 104
maneuvering,    200, 317	dissipation   by  rolling,  82	Froude   number,	202
swept  path,  318	Environmental    operability,   137	Froude   number   (synchronism),	104
Cross   spectral   analysis,   103	Environmental    effects	Froude's law, 295
Currents	currents,   271	Froude-Krylov
effect   of local,  271	wind,  268	approximation,	50


426	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Froude-Krylov     (continued)	Lateral   motions,   285	Measurements,	full-scale (continued)
exciting   forces,   50, 58	Leeway   angle,  83, 193	roll, 82
sectional   amplitude,   58	Lewis-forms,   60	Metacentric height
Full-scale   measurement	Lift  coefficient,   control   surface,   234, 295	effect on roll, 78, 80, 170
pitch-heave,   70	Linear  random  theory	variation in, 83
rolling,  82		validity   for  ships,  102	Mission effectiveness, 3, 152, 138 
validity   for  other   than  normal  ship	Model coefficients; see coefficients
Gallatin  tests,   380	forms,   103	Model tests
Gaussian   process,   84	Linear   superposition    theory,   84	bending movement in waves, 102 
Gyroscopic   stabilizers,    133, 135	Loads,  wave,  122	pitching and heaving, 69, 70
Longitudinal    Center   of Buoyancy   (LCB),	speed   loss  in  waves,  120
"Harbor"	speed,  251	164	seakeeping, 69
Haskind   relations,    51, 58	Model tests, maneuvering
Head  reach,  254	Machinery   characteristics	captive, 217, 221, 243
Head  seas	effects   of  maneuvering,   258, 397	comparison of results, 243
motions  in, 42	Magnification   factor,   78	free-running, 215
exciting   forces  in, 67	Mass  transport,    9	full-scale data comparison, 232
Heave	Maneuvers,   definitive,  206	hydraulic, 217
acceleration   variance,   99	crash  astern,   258	in astern seas, 277
in  irregular   waves,  95	Dieudonne   spiral,  202	in restricted waters, 280, 283
Heaving	rudder   cycling,  258	nonlinear prediction from, 229
coupled   with  pitching,   65	thrust   during,   228	rudders, 315
forces   due  to,  124	turning   test,   209	Series 60 tests, 245
general   considerations,    65	overshoot   (zigzag),   206	Model  testing   (perturbation),	357 
natural    period  of,  103	pullout  spiral,  204	Moment, bending; see Bending Moment
Heel	submersible,    324	Moments, motion
angle   in  a turn,   212	Maneuvering    model  techniques	exciting, 42, 58
during   maneuvers,    228	oscillator,   224	radiating,    42
Helmsman    error  tests,   381	planar   motion  mechanism,   221	restoring,    42
High-speed   vessels		rotating-arm     tests,   221, 224, 243	Motion stability; see Stability, Motion 
control  requirements,	325	straight-line    tests,   222	Motion, equations of; see Equations of
Horn   rudder,   314, 367, 393	Maneuvers,    nonlinear	Motion
Hovgaard    effect,  401	captive   model  tests,   221	Motions of ships in regular waves, 2
Human   factor,   325	effect   of  hull  configuration,   339, 342	control of, 126
Hydrofoils,    control   of, 267, 325	free-running     model tests,   215	linear theory of, 41
nonlinear    equations    of  motion, 217, 229	local  and   relative,  109
Indexes	Maneuvers,   prediction   of	longitudinal, 65
K'  and   T  coursekeeping    and  turning,	bare   hull derivatives,   236	sinusoidal, 42
207, 327	control  derivatives,    236	with six degrees of freedom, 45, 109
stability,   207	Maneuverability	yawing and broaching, 116
controllability,    320	high-speed   vessels,   325	Munk moment, 237
trial,  320	submersibles,    323	Natural period; see Period, natural


motion   stability,   199, 337	trial codes, 317, 318
Instability	Maneuvering
in turning,    199	characteristics,	317


Newton's Law, 46
Norrbin parameter, 208


in waves,   272	criteria,   317	Observations, maneuvering, 232, 258, _
transverse,    203	devices,  333	Ochi wave spectrum, 40
Interactions	effect  of	Oscillator technique (pmm), 224
between    two vessels,   287	fixed fins,  235	Operability index, 151
hull  and  rudder,   292	block  coefficient,  327	Overshoot (zigzag) maneuver, 206,317
  vessel   and   waterway,   279, 326	hull  configuration,    333, 336	angle of, 208 
Irregular    waves	moveable fins, 333
heave   acceleration   in, 99	propellers,   397	Path, ship's
heave  in, 95	propulsion   plants,   397	changing ability, 317
motions   in, 92	full-scale   tests   in, 258, 317	keeping ability, 317
pitch  in, 96	wind,  269	Performance prediction, 108
rolling  in, 100	current,   271	Performance requirements, 316
speed   reduction   in, 105	astern   seas,  274	Period/length	ratio, 105 
restricted    waters,   279	Period, natural _
Joessel's    formula,   302, 384	standards,    318	effect of GM, GZ, 78, 170
Jones'   formula,   236	test  code,  318	heaving,   103
JONSW  AP  wave  spectrum,   38	trials,   318	pitching,   103
Meander   maneuver,   324	rolling, 103
Kalman   filter,  249	Measurements,    full-scale	magnitude of, 105
Kempf   overshoot   maneuver,   206	pitch,  heave,  70	of waves, 8


INDEX	427
Pitch	Response   theory	Rudders (continued)
radius   of  gyration,   69	computations,    92	forces and moments, 199, 292
Pitching	long-crested   waves	height,	365
effect   on controllability,    195	zero  speed,  86	horn, 314, 367, 393
Pitching   (motion)	forward   speed,  87	interaction with hull, 292
coupled   with  heaving,   65	short-crested    seas	location, 364, 366 
effect   of  speed  and  hydrostatic		statistics    of  maxima,  89, 90	model  test,	302
  coefficient,  66	Reynolds   number,   rudders,   295	multiple, 298, 368 
effect   of wavelength,    105	Righting    arm curve,  79	number of, 368
effect   on resistance,    118	Risk  factor,   331	scale  effects,	295
forces   due  to,  124	Roll	section  shape  selection,	375
full-scale   measurements,	105	behavior   at  resonance,   78	size, 278, 370
in  irregular    waves,  97	center   of, 77	skeg,	316
in  oblique  seas,  109	control  of,  127	stall, 293, 375
subcritical,    105	curve  of,  82	torque   curve,	386
supercritical,    108	extinction   test,   80, 82	twin, 368
synchronous,    105	instability,   83	types of, 365, 370
Pitching,    natural   period,  105	damping,   76, 79	vibration induced by, 365
means   of  shortening,    106	artificial,   170	spade,	387
Pitching   and  heaving	devices,  127	Rudder   stock
control  of,  136	estimation   of,  81	bending   moment,	292
coupled,  67	mechanism   involved,  82	calculations,	292
guidance    for  design,   160, 166	moments,   83	location,	364
Pivot   point (turning),    209	non-linearity   of,  102	size, 365
Planar    motion   mechanism,  224, 221	resonant    period  of,  78	torque prediction, 240, 383 
Powering    in waves,   120	righting arm, 79
Prandtl's    theory,   299	Rolling	Scale effect
Pressure,    fluid, 48	decrement,   82	control  surface,	295
Profiles,  wave,  7	effect  on	rudders,	295
Propellers	resistance,    120	model  tests,	227
effects  of,  397	personnel,   73	Sea data, typical, 2, 26, 28
effect  on	factors   affecting,   170	Seakeeping
maneuvers,    228, 397	forces   due  to,  73, 124	above  water   form,	167
stability,   397	in  irregular   waves,   100	database,	109
turning,   348	natural    period  of,  101	design  guidance,	166
turning   moment,   400	in oblique  seas	for  rolling,	170
thrust,   228	reduction    of, by,  101	high  performance    ships,	171
transverse    forces,   400	tanks,   127	operating   envelope,	151
vertical-axis,    407	bilge  keels,  79, 127	pitching   and  heaving,	160
Properties,    wave,  8	fin stabilizers,   134	procedures evaluation for, 174
Propulsion   efficiency	gyroscopic   stabilizers,   135	merchant   ships,	175
reduced   in waves,   118	synchronous,    101, 104	U.S. Navy,	176
Pullout   spiral   maneuver,   204	Rotating-arm    tests	Seakeeping Performance Index, 3, 127,
facilities,   222	138, 140
turning,   221	criteria, 137, 141, 144
Radiation   problem,   54	Rudder   cycling  maneuver,   258	limiting  value,	142
Radius,   turning    circle,  209, 210	Rudders    (see   also control  surfaces)		steps in obtaining, 150, 160 
Resistance,    added,   118		aeration,   293, 367	Sea-kindliness,	2
effect  on	all-moveable,   367	Sea  states
pitching   and  heaving,   118	area,  365, 369	real,  27
rolling,   120	augmentation    of, 404	statistical    representation,	5, 27, 28
    yawing,   120	aspect   ratio,   291, 298, 306	Seawitch collision, 317 
Response    Amplitude    Operator  (RAO), 85	balance,  383	Sensors,   wave  height,	268
heaving,   96	balanced,   367	Shallow water effects on
pitching,   96	bow,  366	turning    circle,  280
rolling,   100	canted,   367	maneuvering,	279
Response,   ship	cavitation,   293	stopping   distance,	281
components   of, 41	center   of pressure,    292	sinkage    and  trim,  290
derived,   2, 109	deflection   angle,  199, 375	Shipping water
in  irregular    waves,  95	deflection,  maximum,   375	forward,	112
in  a seaway,   84	deflection   rate,  218, 379	aft,	115
synthesis	design,  364	Simulation
heave,   pitch,  95, 97	flanking,  370	bridge,	360
rolling,   100	flapped,  310	harbor and canal, 359
theory   of,  92	flow around,   310	ship  handling,	358


428	PRINCIPLES OF NAVAL ARCHITECTURE

Sinkage   and  trim,  290	Stability,   motion  (continued)	Systems identification methods 
Slamming		in- waves,   272		output error, 249
probability   of,  115	indexes,   199, 337	extended Kalman filter, 249
stresses,    116	Stabilizers (roll)
Slender   Body  theory,   53,  55, 64	active,  133	Tactical diameter
Slope	fins,  134	definition, 209, 297
spectrum,   22	gyroscope,   183, 135	variation in, 348
wave   surface,   7, 22	moving   weight,  127, 128	Tanks, anti-roll
Slow  steaming   ability,  318	passive,   127, 132	active, 183, 136
Smith   effect,   7, 44, 122	rudder,   135	passive, 127
Snap  roll,  213, 323	sails,  127	Taylor expansion, 196, 218
Spade  rudder,   387	tanks,    127, 128, 136	Thrust
Spectra,   wave	Stabilization    of roll,  127	astern, 251
development    and  decay,  24	Standard    ship   motion progrsm,    54	constant deduction, 253 
point,  30	Standards	in a maneuver, 228
directional,   34	controllability,    320	maximum available, 252
Spectrum	maneuvering,    317	propeller, 254
Bretschneider,    37	status    of development,   320	Torque
broadness,    parsmeter    of,  18	Standing   waves,   11	astern value, 256 
concept,  2, 18	Stall,   control   surface,    227, 293, 375	curve,   rudder,   386
directiona,   121	Starting    of ships,  251	prime   movers,  253
JONSW AP,  38	Station   "India",    27	ratio, 256
narrow   band,  19	Statistics	on rudder stock, 240, 383
Ochi,  40	of maxima,   90	steering gear, 383
Pierson-Moskowitz,    36	wave,  5	calculation, 388, 394
simple-point,   14, 22	Statistical    analysis   (sea  state),   5	Trajectories
slope,  22	Steady   turning   radius,   210	mathematical modeling,  249 
frequency    of encounter,   22	Steering    (see also  maneuvering)	systems identification method, 249
energy,   14	diagrsm   of,  328	Transfer,    turning
Spectrum   of	in  astern   seas,  274	definition,  209
added  resistance,    119	in canals,  282	Transit speed, 3, 138, 151
energy,   14	in  proximity   to  other  ships,  288	Trials, full-scale
encounter,22	in  shallow  water,   279	basic considerations, 318
slope  (wave),   22	"Stingers,"	hydrofoil,   268	codes, 317
Stokes  equation,   9	E880 Bernicia, 258
Stopping  of ships	E8S0 Lima, 258
ability,  254, 318	E880 Osaka, 231, 281, 319


maneuvering, 252
reduction or loss
  in a turn, 214 
"harbor",	251
supercritical, 108
reduction in seas, 118, 138
transit, 3, 138, 151
  polar plot, 150 
Spiral maneuvers
Bech, 204
Dieudonne, 202

pullout,
204

reverse,
Spreading
319
function,

90
Springing,
123



auxiliary    devices,  251, 263	mariner, 230
distances   required,   254	maneuvering, 316
Esso Suez  trial,  259	indexes of, 320
in  shallow  water,   281	Trochoidal   wave,  9
emergency,   316	Tuck's   theory,   290
simulation   of,  259	Tucker meter, 30
with  freedom   to  turn,   258	Tugboats
Strip   theory,   2, 41, 53	use in maneuvering, 263, 287
S
u
p
e
r
c
r
i
t
i
c
a
l
	
p
o
w
e
r
 
t
i
e
-
u
p
,
 
2
6
3
speed,  108	Tuning factor, 69, 104
operation   factors,   108	Turning, model
heave  response,   97	planar motion mechanism, 221
Superposition,    2	rotating arm, 221, 223
theory   of linear,  84	straight-line, 222
of  bending  moments,   102	Turning, ship


Squat,  ships,  290	extension,    short   crested  seas,  2	ability, 209, 318, 343
Stability,   dynamic	principle  of,  119	analysis, 209
prediction   of, 350	Surge,   54, 56, 66	angle of heel, 212
Stability,   motion	Sway,   73, 77, 83	characteristics,	209
criteria,   317, 200	Swell,  5	circle
definition,   195	Swell-up	maneuver, 209
derivatives,    200	static,   114	test, 209, 291, 317
directional,   195	dynamic,   114	prediction,   343
criterion,   200, 317	Swept-path   criterion,   318	heel   during,  212
effects  of	Synchronism	path, 209, 297
fins,  333	heave   and pitch,  69	pivot point, 209
appendages,    333	rolling,   78, 101, 103	speed reduction during, 214
propellers,   397	Froude   number   for,  104	steady radius of, 210


INDEX	429







Variance, wave, 8





diffraction   theory,   
65	statistical    representation,	4, 20
effect  on	Stoke's, 9
bending   
moment,   102, 
122	surface profile, 7


Velocity	resistance,    120	Trochoidal, 9
orbital,   7	energy   of,  8	variance, 8
wave,  6	excitation   of,  123	velocity of, 6, 7
Vertical-axis   propellers,   4m	finite  height,   9	Wave systems
Vertical   overshoot   maDeUveI', 324	group   velocity,  6, 7	damping of, 24
Velocity   potential,   6, 8	generational     theory  of,  15	generation and decay of, 24
harmonic   (sinusoidal),   8	stationary,    3
Wave   bending   moments,    102, 122, 123	height,   8 observation   of	stochastic,   3
Wave  effect  on	length,   8	"Whiteness",	249
course  keeping,   272	period,  8	Wind effects on control, 268
directional   stability,   272	properties, 3, 8
Wave   height  sensors,   268	"significant"	height,   30	Vaw
Wave  loads	amplitudes,   20	angle of, 193, 272
bending   moments,   122	records   analysis,   3	checking ability, 317
shearing   forces,   122	simple  gravity,   2	Vawing
